PART I - THE FACTS
PART I 
THE FACTS
1
AN IMPORTANT PASSENGER ON THE TAURUS EXPRESS
It was five o’clock on a winter’s morning in Syria. Alongside the platform at Aleppo stood the train grandly designated in railway guides as the Taurus Express. It consisted of a kitchen and dining-car, a sleeping-car and two local coaches.
By the step leading up into the sleeping-car stood a young French lieutenant, resplendent in uniform conversing, with a small man muffled up to the ears of whom nothing was visible but a pink-tipped nose and the two points of an upward-curled moustache.
It was freezingly cold, and this job of seeing off a distinguished stranger was not one to be envied, but Lieutenant Dubosc performed his part manfully. Graceful phrases fell from his lips in polished French. Not that he knew what it was all about. There had been rumours, of course, as there always were in such cases. The General’s—his General’s—temper had grown worse and worse. And then there had come this Belgian stranger—all the way from England, it seemed. There had been a week—a week of curious tensity. And then certain things had happened. A very distinguished officer had committed suicide, another had suddenly resigned, anxious faces had suddenly lost their anxiety, certain military precautions were relaxed. And the General, Lieutenant Dubosc’s own particular General, had suddenly looked ten years younger.
Dubosc had overheard part of a conversation between him and the stranger. “You have saved us, mon cher,” said the General emotionally, his great white moustache trembling as he spoke. “You have saved the honour of the French Army—you have averted much bloodshed! How can I thank you for acceding to my request? To have come so far—”
To which the stranger (by name M. Hercule Poirot) had made a fitting reply including the phrase—“But indeed, do I not remember that once you saved my life?” And then the General had made another fitting reply to that, disclaiming any merit for that past service; and with more mention of France, of Belgium, of glory, of honour and of such kindred things they had embraced each other heartily and the conversation had ended.
As to what it had all been about, Lieutenant Dubosc was still in the dark, but to him had been delegated the duty of seeing off M. Poirot by the Taurus Express, and he was carrying it out with all the zeal and ardour befitting a young officer with a promising career ahead of him.
“To-day is Sunday,” said Lieutenant Dubosc. “Tomorrow, Monday evening, you will be in Stamboul.”
It was not the first time he had made this observation. Conversations on the platform, before the departure of a train, are apt to be somewhat repetitive in character.
“That is so,” agreed M. Poirot.
“And you intend to remain there a few days, I think?”
“Mais oui. Stamboul, it is a city I have never visited. It would be a pity to pass through—comme ?a.” He snapped his fingers descriptively. “Nothing presses—I shall remain there as a tourist for a few days.”
“La Sainte Sophie, it is very fine,” said Lieutenant Dubosc, who had never seen it.
A cold wind came whistling down the platform. Both men shivered. Lieutenant Dubosc managed to cast a surreptitious glance at his watch. Five minutes to five—only five minutes more!
Fancying that the other man had noticed his glance, he hastened once more into speech.
“There are few people travelling this time of year,” he said, glancing up at the windows of the sleeping-car above them.
“That is so,” agreed M. Poirot.
“Let us hope you will not be snowed up in the Taurus!”
“That happens?”
“It has occurred, yes. Not this year, as yet.”
“Let us hope, then,” said M. Poirot. “The weather reports from Europe, they are bad.
“Very bad. In the Balkans there is much snow.”
“In Germany, too, I have heard.”
“Eh bien,” said Lieutenant Dubosc hastily as another pause seemed to be about to occur. “Tomorrow evening at seven-forty you will be in Constantinople.”
“Yes,” said M. Poirot, and went on desperately, “La Sainte Sophie, I have heard it is very fine.”
“Magnificent, I believe.”
Above their heads the blinds of one of the sleeping-car compartments was pushed aside and a young woman looked out.
Mary Debenham had had little sleep since she left Baghdad on the preceding Thursday. Neither in the train to Kirkuk, nor in the Rest House at Mosul, nor last night on the train had she slept properly. Now, weary of lying wakeful in the hot stuffiness of her overheated compartment, she got up and peered out.
This must be Aleppo. Nothing to see, of course. Just a long, poorly lighted platform with loud, furious altercations in Arabic going on somewhere. Two men below her window were talking French. One was a French officer, the other was a little man with enormous moustaches. She smiled faintly. She had never seen anyone quite so heavily muffled up. It must be very cold outside. That was why they heated the train so terribly. She tried to force the window down lower, but it would not go.
The Wagon Lit conductor had come up to the two men. The train was about to depart, he said. Monsieur had better mount. The little man removed his hat. What an egg-shaped head he had! In spite of her preoccupations Mary Debenham smiled. A ridiculous-looking little man. The sort of little man one could never take seriously.
Lieutenant Dubosc was saying his parting speech. He had thought it out beforehand and had kept it till the last minute. It was a very beautiful, polished speech.
Not to be outdone, M. Poirot replied in kind. ...
“En voiture, Monsieur,” said the Wagon Lit conductor. With an air of infinite reluctance M. Poirot climbed aboard the train. The conductor climbed after him. M. Poirot waved his hand. Lieutenant Dubosc came to the salute. The train, with a terrific jerk, moved slowly forward.
“Enfin!” murmured M. Hercule Poirot.
“Brrrrrrrr,” said Lieutenant Dubosc, realising to the full how cold he was.
“Voilà, Monsieur!” The conductor displayed to Poirot with a dramatic gesture the beauty of his sleeping compartment and the neat arrangement of his luggage. “The little valise of Monsieur, I have put it here.”
His outstretched hand was suggestive. Hercule Poirot placed in it a folded note.
“Merci, Monsieur.” The conductor became brisk and business-like. “I have the tickets of Monsieur. I will also take the passport, please. Monsieur breaks his journey in Stamboul, I understand?”
M. Poirot assented. “There are not many people travelling, I imagine?” he said.
“No, Monsieur. I have only two other passengers—both English. A Colonel from India and a young English lady from Baghdad. Monsieur requires anything?”
Monsieur demanded a small bottle of Perrier.
Five o’clock in the morning is an awkward time to board a train. There were still two hours before dawn. Conscious of an inadequate night’s sleep, and of a delicate mission successfully accomplished, M. Poirot curled up in a corner and fell asleep.
When he awoke it was half-past nine he sallied forth to the restaurant car in search of hot coffee.
There was only one occupant at the moment, obviously the young English lady referred to by the conductor. She was tall, slim and dark—perhaps twenty-eight years of age. There was a kind of cool efficiency in the way she was eating her breakfast and in the way she called to the attendant to bring her more coffee which bespoke a knowledge of the world and of travelling. She wore a dark-coloured travelling dress of some thin material eminently suitable for the heated atmosphere of the train.
M. Hercule Poirot, having nothing better to do, amused himself by studying her without appearing to do so.
She was, he judged, the kind of young woman who could take care of herself with perfect ease wherever she went. She had poise and efficiency. He rather liked the severe regularity of her features and the delicate pallor of her skin. He liked the burnished black head with its neat waves of hair, and her eyes—cool, impersonal and grey. But she was, he decided, just a little too efficient to be what he called “jolie femme.”
Presently another person entered the restaurant car. This was a tall man of between forty and fifty, lean of figure, brown of skin, with hair slightly grizzled round the temples.
“The Colonel from India,” said Poirot to himself.
The newcomer gave a little bow to the girl. “Morning, Miss Debenham.”
“Good morning, Colonel Arbuthnot.”
The Colonel was standing with a hand on the chair opposite her.
“Any objections?” he asked.
“Of course not. Sit down.”
“Well, you know, breakfast isn’t always a chatty meal.”
“I should hope not. But I don’t bite.”
The Colonel sat down. “Boy,” he called in peremptory fashion.
He gave an order for eggs and coffee.
His eyes rested for a moment on Hercule Poirot, but they passed on indifferently. Poirot, reading the English mind correctly, knew that he had said to himself. “Only some damned foreigner.”
True to their nationality, the two English people were not chatty. They exchanged a few brief remarks and presently the girl rose and went back to her compartment.
At lunch time the other two again shared a table and again they both completely ignored the third passenger. Their conversation was more animated than at breakfast. Colonel Arbuthnot talked of the Punjab and occasionally asked the girl a few questions about Baghdad where, it became clear, she had been in a post as governess. In the course of conversation they discovered some mutual friends, which had the immediate effect of making them more friendly and less stiff. They discussed old Tommy Somebody and old Reggie Someone Else. The Colonel inquired whether she was going straight through to England or whether she was stopping in Stamboul.
“No, I’m going straight on.”
“Isn’t that rather a pity?”
“I came out this way two years ago and spent three days in Stamboul then.”
“Oh! I see. Well, I may say I’m very glad you are going right through, because I am.”
He made a kind of clumsy little bow, flushing a little as he did so.
“He is susceptible, our Colonel,” thought Hercule Poirot to himself with some amusement. “The train, it is as dangerous as a sea voyage!”
Miss Debenham said evenly that that would be very nice. Her manner was slightly repressive.
The Colonel, Hercule Poirot noticed, accompanied her back to her compartment. Later they passed through the magnificent scenery of the Taurus. As they looked down towards the Cilician Gates, standing in the corridor side by side, a sigh came suddenly from the girl. Poirot was standing near them and heard her murmur:
“It’s so beautiful! I wish—I wish—”
“Yes?”
“I wish I could enjoy it!”
Arbuthnot did not answer. The square line of his jaw seemed a little sterner and grimmer.
“I wish to Heaven you were out of all this,” he said.
“Hush, please. Hush.”
“Oh! it’s all right.” He shot a slightly annoyed glance in Poirot’s direction. Then he went on: “But I don’t like the idea of your being a governess—at the beck and call of tyrannical mothers and their tiresome brats.”
She laughed with just a hint of uncontrol in the sound.
“Oh! you mustn’t think that. The downtrodden governess is quite an exploded myth. I can assure you that it’s the parents who are afraid of being bullied by me.”
They said no more. Arbuthnot was, perhaps, ashamed of his outburst.
“Rather an odd little comedy that I watch here,” said Poirot to himself thoughtfully.
He was to remember that thought of his later.
They arrived at Konya that night about half-past eleven. The two English travellers got out to stretch their legs, pacing up and down the snowy platform.
M. Poirot was content to watch the teeming activity of the station through a window pane. After about ten minutes, however, he decided that a breath of air would not perhaps be a bad thing after all. He made careful preparations, wrapping himself in several coats and mufflers and encasing his neat boots in goloshes. Thus attired, he descended gingerly to the platform and began to pace its length. He walked out beyond the engine.
It was the voices which gave him the clue to the two indistinct figures standing in the shadow of a traffic van. Arbuthnot was speaking.
“Mary—”
The girl interrupted him.
“Not now. Not now. When it’s all over. When it’s behind us—then—”
Discreetly M. Poirot turned away. He wondered. ...
He would hardly have recognised the cool, efficient voice of Miss Debenham. ...
“Curious,” he said to himself.
The next day he wondered whether, perhaps, they had quarrelled. They spoke little to each other. The girl, he thought, looked anxious. There were dark circles under her eyes.
It was about half-past two in the afternoon when the train came to a halt. Heads were poked out of windows. A little knot of men were clustered by the side of the line looking and pointing at something under the dining-car.
Poirot leaned out and spoke to the Wagon Lit conductor who was hurrying past. The man answered, and Poirot drew back his head and, turning, almost collided with Mary Debenham who was standing just behind him.
“What is the matter?” she asked rather breathlessly in French. “Why are we stopping?”
“It is nothing, Mademoiselle. It is something that has caught fire under the dining-car. Nothing serious. It is put out. They are now repairing the damage. There is no danger, I assure you.”
She made a little abrupt gesture, as though she were waving the idea of danger aside as something completely unimportant.
“Yes, yes, I understand that. But the time!”
“The time?”
“Yes, this will delay us.”
“It is possible—yes,” agreed Poirot.
“But we can’t afford delay! This train is due in at 6.55, and one has to cross the Bosphorus and catch the Simplon Orient Express on the other side at nine o’clock. If there is an hour or two of delay we shall miss the connection.”
“It is possible, yes,” he admitted.
He looked at her curiously. The hand that held the window bar was not quite steady; her lips, too, were trembling.
“Does it matter to you very much, Mademoiselle?” he asked.
“Yes. Yes, it does. I—I must catch that train.”
She turned away from him and went down the corridor to join Colonel Arbuthnot.
Her anxiety, however, was needless. Ten minutes later the train started again. It arrived at Hayda-passar only five minutes late, having made up time on the journey.
The Bosphorus was rough and M. Poirot did not enjoy the crossing. He was separated from his travelling companions on the boat and did not see them again.
On arrival at the Galata Bridge he drove straight to the Tokatlian Hotel.
第一部 事实
第一部 事实
第一章　一位重要的旅客             
    叙利亚。一个冬天的早晨，五点钟。阿勒颇城的月台旁，停着一列火车，这列车在铁路指南上，堂而皇之地称为陶鲁斯快车。它由一节炊事车、一节义餐车、一节卧铺车厢和两节普通客车组成。
    在卧铺车厢门口的踏脚板旁，站着一个年轻的法国陆军中尉，他身着耀眼的军装，正和一个小个子谈话。这小个子连头带耳都用围巾里着，除了一个鼻尖通红的鼻子和两个往上翘的胡子尖外，什么也看不见。
    天气非常冷，护送一位高贵的陌生人这一差使，并不令人羡慕，但是杜波斯克中尉还是精神抖擞地履行着自己的职责。他用优美的法语说话，措词文雅，口齿清楚。他并不了解有关的全部情况。当然，有许多谣传，正如在这种情况下常有的那样。将军──他的将军──的心情，变得越来越坏。后来，来了这么一位陌生的比利人──好象是从英国远道而来的。
过了一个星期──莫明其妙地紧张了一星期。接着就发生了某些事情。一个非常著名的军官自杀了，另外一个辞了职──一张张忧虑的面孔突然消失了忧虑，某些军事上的预防措施放松了，而将军──杜波斯克中尉专门服侍的将军──看上去突然年轻了十岁。
    杜波斯克无意中曾听到将军和这位陌生人在一次谈话中说过这些话。“你救了我们，我亲爱的，”将军激动地说，在他说话时，他唇上的一大抹白胡子抖动着。“你拯救了法国军队的光荣──你防止了一场流血事件！你答应了我的请求，我该怎样来感谢你啊？这样老远的来──”
    这位陌生人（他叫赫卡尔•波洛先生）对此作了一个恰如其分的回答，其中有这样一句话：“可是，你救过我的命难道我能忘记吗？”接着，将军又对那位否认在过去的工作中有过任何功劳的人，作了另外的恰如其份的回答。他们更多地提及法国、比利时，提到光荣、荣誉，以及诸如此类的事情，他们互相亲切地拥抱，结束了这场谈话。
    至于他们谈的这些是什么事，杜波斯克中尉仍然一无所知，但是，护送波洛先生上陶鲁斯客车的任务，委托给了他，因此，他以一个有着远大前途的青年军官惯有的全部热情，开始执行这一任务。
    “今天是星期天，”杜波斯克中尉说，“明天，星期一傍晚，你就可以到伊斯坦布尔了。”
    他讲这话已经不是第一次了。火车开动前月台上的谈话，人们往往都会有点重复。
    “是啊。”波洛先生表示赞同。
    “我想，你打算在那儿住上几天吧？”
    “那还用说。伊斯坦布尔，是座我从未观光过的城市。错过这机会，岂不是太可惜了──是这样。”
    他象是说明似的啪的一声捻了一下自己的手指，“没什么急事──我要作为一个旅行者在那儿住上几天。”
    “圣索菲，美极了。”杜波斯克中尉说。其实，他从未看见过圣索菲。
    一阵寒风呼啸着朝月台刮来。两人都哆嗦了一下。杜波斯克中尉设法偷偷朝自己的手表瞥了一眼。四点五十五分──只有五分钟了！
    他以为对方已经注意到他这偷偷的一瞥，于是又急忙说起说话来。
    “一年当中，在这种时令旅行的人不多。”他说着，朝他们上方的卧铺车厢的车窗看了一眼。
    “是啊！”波洛先生表示赞同。
    “但愿你别让大雪封在陶鲁斯！”
    “有这样的事吗？”
    “是的，发生过。不是今年，这是指从前。”
    “那就但愿如此吧。”波洛先生说。“欧洲来的天气预报，很不好。”
    “天气很坏，巴尔干半岛雪很大。”
    “听说，德国也是这样。”
    “好了，”眼看谈话马上又要中断了，杜波斯克中尉急忙说，“明天傍晚七点四十分，你就可以到君士坦丁堡了。”
    “是的，”波洛先生说，不顾一切地继续着谈话。“圣索菲，我听说美极了。”
    “我相信，十分宏伟。”
    在他们的头顶，卧铺车厢一间包房的窗帘被拉到一旁，有个年轻妇女朝车外打量着。
    从上星期三离开巴格达以来，睡得很少。玛丽•德贝汉在到基尔库克的火车上，在摩苏尔的旅馆里，以及在昨天晚上的火车上，她都没好好睡过。醒着躺在温度过高的房间的闷热空气里，实在使人受不了，于是，她就起身朝车外看看。
    这一定是阿勒颇了。当然，什么也看不见，只有一个长长的、灯光很暗的月台，月台上，什么地方有人在用阿拉伯语大声、狂怒地争吵。在她的窗下，有两个人男人正是用法语交谈。一个是法国军官，另一个是留着一大抹翘胡子的小个子。她微微一笑。她还从没有见过里得这样严实的人。外面一定非常冷。怪不得把车厢里的气温加热到如此可怕的程度。她想用力把车窗拉低一点，可是拉不下来。
    卧车列车员朝这两个男人走了过来。他说，列车马上要开出，先生最好还是上车吧。小个人男人脱了脱帽。啊，是个鸡蛋一般的秃头。全神贯注的玛丽•德贝汉不由自主地笑了起来。一个看起来滑稽可笑的小个子男人，对这种人，谁都不会认真地看待的。
    杜波斯克中尉正说着他的送别词。他事先就想好了这些话，特地将它保留到最后的时刻。这是几句非优美、精练的话。
    为了不至于显得相形见绌，波洛先生的答词同样优动听。
    “上车吧，先生。”列车员说。波洛先生带着一种依依不异别的神情上了车。列车员也跟在他的后面爬了上来。波洛先生朝车外挥着手。杜波斯克行军礼。列车猛地一动，缓缓地朝前驶去。
    “终于结束了！”波洛先生咕哝着。
    “嗬，嗬。”杜波斯克中尉哆嗦了一下，现在他才完全意识到他是多么冷……“在这儿，先生。”列车员用一种演戏般的姿势，向波洛夸耀卧室的漂亮，以及为他放置得整整齐齐的行李。“先生的小旅行包，我把它放在这儿了。”
    他伸出的一只手带有某种暗示。波洛往他手里放了一张折拢的钞票。
    “谢谢，先生。”列车员立刻变得动作敏捷，办事有条有理起来。“先生的车票已在我这儿，请将护照也给我。据我所知，先生中途要在伊斯坦布尔下车？”
    波洛先生点头称是，并问：“另外我只有两个旅客──两位英国人。一位是印度来的陆军上校，还有一位是巴格达来的年轻英国小姐。先生需要什么吗？”
    波洛先生要了一小瓶梨子酒。
    凌晨五点钟是一个很尴尬的上车时间，离天亮还有两个小时。波洛深感晚上睡眠不足，而现在任务已经胜利完成，于是他就蜷缩在一个角落里，睡着了。
    醒过来时，已经九点半。他走出包房，朝餐车走去。想去弄杯热咖啡喝。
    这时，只一个占座的人，显然就是列车员提到过的那位年轻的英国小姐。她个子修长，身材苗条，一头黑发──大约二十八岁。看她吃早饭的样子，以及叫唤侍者给她再送一杯咖啡的派头，有一种沉着冷静的能力，这表明了她的老于世故和深谙旅行之道。她穿一身料子很薄的深色旅行服，这特别适合列车上加热了的空气。
    波洛先生没什么事好做，就以不露声色地研究她作为消遣。
    他断定，她是这样一种年轻女人，她无论去到哪里，都能照料自己，过得十分悠闲自在。她沉着，有能耐。他颇为喜欢她那五官端正的面孔和娇嫩白净的皮肤。他也喜欢她那乌黑光亮的卷发，还有他的灰色眼睛，沉着冷静，莫测高深。但是，他认定，她只是有点儿及有能耐了，以致不能成为他所称为的“美人”。
    不一会，另一个人走进了餐车。这是一个四、五十岁的高个子男人，体态瘦削，黝黑皮肤，两鬓稍微有点灰白。
    “印度来的上校。”波洛自言自语地说。
    新进来的人对姑娘略微点了点头。
    “你好，德贝汉小姐。”
    “早上好，阿巴思诺特上校。”
    上校站着，一只手放在她对面地椅子上。
    “有妨碍么？”
    “当然没有。请坐。”
    “谢谢，你知道，吃早餐通常不闲聊。”
    “我本来就不想闲聊。不过我并不会咬人。”
    上校坐了下来。
    “来人哪，”他用命令的口气叫道。
    他要了鸡蛋和咖啡。
    他的目光在波洛身上停了片刻，可是马上就毫不在意地掠过去了。波洛能确切地猜出这个英国人的心思，知道他在自言自语地说：“该死的外国佬。”
    两个英国人遵守他们的民族习惯，没有聊天，他们只是简短地交谈了几句。不一会，姑娘就站起身来，回自已的房间去了。
    吃中饭时，这两个人又同坐在一张桌子旁，仍旧丝毫不理睬这第三个旅客。他们的谈话比吃早餐时要热烈得多。阿巴思诺特上校谈到旁遮普，偶尔还向姑娘问了几个有关巴格达的问题，显然，她曾在那儿做过家庭教师。在谈话的过程中，他们发现了几个彼此都相识的朋友，这立即产生了效果，使得他们更为友好，更少拘谨。他们议论到一个叫老汤米的，还有一个叫杰丽什么。上校问她是直达英国，还是中途在伊斯坦布尔下车。
    “我直达英国。”
    “那不是太可惜了吗？”
    “两年前，这条路我走过一趟，那时在伊斯坦布尔呆了三天。”
    “哦，我明白了。好，你是直达，我得说我非常高兴，因为我也是直达。”
    当他这样说的时候，他稍带几分笨拙地微微点着头，脸都有点红了。
    “我们的上校容易激动，”波洛怀着某种逗趣的心情暗想。“这列快车，就象在海上航行一样危险啊！”
    德贝汉小姐淡淡地说：“那倒是好极了。”她的举止显得有点拘谨。
    波洛注意到，上校陪着她回到她的包房。后来，列车穿行在陶鲁斯山脉的动人景色之中。当他们正并排站在过道里，朝西里辛山口眺望时，姑娘突然发出一声叹息。波洛正站在他们的旁边，并且听到了她的低语：
    “多美啊！我希望──我希望──”
    “什么？”
    “我真希望我能尽情地欣赏一番！”
    阿巴思诺特没有回答。他颌部的那条方形线，似乎更加严峻，更加冷酷一点了。
    “我多么渴望你能摆脱这一切啊！”他说。
    “嘘，别响！嘘！”
    “噢！没关系！”他有几分生气地朝波洛的方向瞪了一眼。接着继续说：“可是我不喜欢你做家庭教师的主意──一切都得听从那些专横的母亲，还有她们那些讨厌的小鬼。”
    她笑了起来，声音中带有一种无拘无束的味道。
    “哦！你不应该那样想。受尽蹂躏的家庭教师，这完全是一个已被戳穿的神话。我可以向你保证，相反，是那些做父母的，害怕我被欺侮。”
    他们不再交谈，阿巴思诺特也许为自己的感情的迸发感到羞愧了。
    “我在这儿看到的可以说是一场奇怪的小喜剧。”波洛若有所思地自言自语说。
    以后，他会记住他的这一想法的。
    当天晚上十一点半左右，他们到达了康尼雅。那两位英国旅客下车活动腿脚，他们在积雪的月台上来回地踱着。
    波洛先生透过玻璃窗，心满意足地注视着车站上的繁忙景象。然而，大约过了十分钟，他决定，下去呼吸一下新鲜空气，也许毕竟不是一桩坏事。他作了仔细的准备，把自己紧里在外套、围巾里，又在整洁的靴子外面套上套鞋。这样打扮停当后，他才战战兢兢地下到月台上，沿月台踱着步。他走过了机车。
    一个谈话声为他提供了线索，有两个人模糊的人影站在一辆蓬车的阴影里。
    阿巴思诺特正在说话。
    “玛丽──”
    姑娘打断了他。
    “现在不行。现在不行。等事情全部结束。等那事情过去之后──那时候──”
    波洛先生谨慎地避开了。他感到奇怪。
    他一下很难听到玛丽•德贝汉小姐那冷冷的、有力的声音……“难以理解。”他自言自语地说。
    第二天，他闹不清楚他们是否吵过架了。他们彼此之间很少讲话。他觉得，姑娘看上去忧虑不安。在她的眼睛周围，也现了黑晕。
    下午两点半左右，列车突然停下了。人们一个个地从窗口伸出头去。有几个男人聚集在在铁轨一旁，朝餐车下面的什么东西看着，还用手指指点点。
    波洛探出身子，向匆匆走过的列车员问了几句，那人作了回答，波洛缩回脑袋，一转身，几乎和站在他后面的玛丽•德贝汉小姐撞了个满怀。
    “出了什么事啦？”她用法语问道，呼吸颇为急促。“为什么停下来？”
    “没什么，小姐，餐车下有会么东西烧着了。不严重。已经扑灭了。现在他们正在修复损坏的地方。我向你保证，没有危险。”
    她作了一个有点儿粗暴的手势，仿佛她是把是在把有危险这种想法，当作无关紧要的东西，挥到了一旁。
    “是的，是的。这我知道，可是时间！”
    “时间？”
    “是的，这会误了我们的时间。”
    “这有可能──是的。”波洛表示赞同。
    “可我们耽误不起呀！这列火车预定六点五十五分到达，可人家还要渡过博斯普鲁斯海峡，得在九点以前直上对岸的东方快车。要是拖延了一、两个小时，我们就会赶不上那趟车的。”
    “这有可能，是的。”波洛承认。
    他好奇朝她打量着。她那只握着窗条的手有点颤抖，她的嘴唇也在哆嗦。
    “这对你关系十分重大么，小姐？”他问道。
    “是的，是的，十分重大。我──我必须赶上那趟车。”
    她离开了他，到过道上去和阿巴思诺特上校交谈去了。
    然而，她的担心是多余的。十分钟以后，火车又开动了。抵达赫梯巴沙时，只晚点了五分钟后其它时间已在途中抢回来了。
    博斯普鲁斯海峡风浪汹涌，波洛先生无心欣赏这次横渡。他和坐在汽艇上的旅伴未再见面，顾自走了。
    到了格拉塔大桥，他就乘车直接去托凯琳旅馆。
2 THE TOKATLIAN HOTEL
2THE TOKATLIAN HOTEL
At the Tokatlian, Hercule Poirot asked for a room with bath. Then he stepped over to the concierge’s desk and inquired for letters.
There were three waiting for him and a telegram. His eyebrows rose a little at the sight of the telegram. It was unexpected.
He opened it in his usual neat, unhurried fashion. The printed words stood out clearly.
Development you predicted in Kassner case has come unexpectedly. Please return immediately.
“Voilà ce qui est embêtant,” muttered Poirot vexedly. He glanced up at the clock. “I shall have to go on to-night,” he said to the concierge. “At what time does the Simplon Orient leave?”
“At nine o’clock, Monsieur.”
“Can you get me a sleeper?”
“Assuredly, Monsieur. There is no difficulty this time of year. The trains are almost empty. First-class or second?”
“First.”
“Très bien, Monsieur. How far are you going?”
“To London.”
“Bien, Monsieur. I will get you a ticket to London and reserve your sleeping-car accommodation in the Stamboul-Calais coach.”
Poirot glanced at the clock again. It was ten minutes to eight. “I have time to dine?”
“But assuredly, Monsieur.”
The little Belgian nodded. He went over and cancelled his room order and crossed the hall to the restaurant.
As he was giving his order to the waiter, a hand was placed on his shoulder.
“Ah, mon vieux, but this is an unexpected pleasure!” said a voice behind him.
The speaker was a short stout elderly man, his hair cut en brosse. He was smiling delightedly.
Poiret sprang up.
“M. Bouc!”
“M. Poirot!”
M. Bouc was a Belgian, a director of the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons Lits, and his acquaintance with the former star of the Belgian police force dated back many years.
“You find yourself far from home, mon cher,” said M. Bouc.
“A little affair in Syria.”
“Ah! and you return home—when?”
“To-night.”
“Splendid! I, too. That is to say, I go as far as Lausanne, where I have affairs. You travel on the Simplon Orient, I presume?”
“Yes. I have just asked them to get me a sleeper. It was my intention to remain here some days, but I have. received a telegram recalling me to England on important business.”
“Ah!” sighed M. Bouc. “Les affaires—les affaires! But you, you are at the top of the tree nowadays, mon vieux!”
“Some little success I have had, perhaps.” Hercule Poirot tried to look modest but failed signally.
M. Bouc laughed.
“We will meet later,” he said.
Hercule Poirot addressed himself to the task of keeping his moustaches out of the soup.
That difficult task accomplished, he glanced round him whilst waiting for the next course. There were only about half a dozen people in the restaurant, and of those half dozen there were only two that interested Hercule Poirot.
These two sat at a table not far away. The younger was a likeable-looking young man of thirty, clearly an American. It was, however, not he but his companion who had attracted the little detective’s attention.
He was a man perhaps of between sixty and seventy. From a little distance he had the bland aspect of a philanthropist. His slightly bald head, his domed forehead, the smiling mouth that displayed a very white set of false teeth—all seemed to speak of a benevolent personality. Only the eyes belied this assumption. They were small, deep-set and crafty. Not only that. As the man, making some remark to his young companion, glanced across the room, his gaze stopped on Poirot for a moment and just for that second there was a strange malevolence, an unnatural tensity in the glance.
Then he rose.
“Pay the bill, Hector,” he said.
His voice was slightly husky in tone. It had a queer, soft, dangerous quality.
When Poirot rejoined his friend in the lounge, the other two men were just leaving the hotel. Their luggage was being brought down. The younger was supervising the process. Presently he opened the glass door and said:
“Quite ready now, Mr. Ratchett.”
The elder man grunted an assent and passed out.
“Eh bien,” said Poirot. “What do you think of those two?”
“They are Americans,” said M. Bouc.
“Assuredly they are Americans. I meant what did you think of their personalities?”
“The young man seemed quite agreeable.”
“And the other?”
“To tell you the truth, my friend, I did not care for him. He produced on me an unpleasant impression. And you?”
Hercule Poirot was a moment in replying.
“When he passed me in the restaurant,” he said at last, “I had a curious impression. It was as though a wild animal—an animal savage, but savage! you understand—had passed me by.”
“And yet he looked altogether of the most respectable.”
“Précisément! The body—the cage—is everything of the most respectable—but through the bars, the wild animal looks out.”
“You are fanciful, mon vieux,” said M. Bouc.
“It may be so. But I could not rid myself of the impression that evil had passed me by very close.”
“That respectable American gentleman?”
“That respectable American gentleman.”
“Well,” said M. Bouc cheerfully, “it may be so. There is much evil in the world.”
At that moment the door opened and the concierge came towards them. He looked concerned and apologetic.
“It is extraordinary, Monsieur,” he said to Poirot. “There is not one first-class sleeping berth to be had on the train.”
“Comment?” cried M. Bouc. “At this time of year? Ah, without doubt there is some party of journalists—of politicians—?”
“I don’t know, sir,” said the concierge, turning to him respectfully. “But that’s how it is.”
“Well, well.” M. Bouc turned to Poirot. “Have no fear, my friend. We will arrange something. There is always one compartment, the No. 16, which is not engaged. The conductor sees to that!” He smiled, then glanced up at the clock. “Come,” he said, “it is time we started.”
At the station M. Bouc was greeted with respectful empressement by the brown-uniformed Wagon Lit conductor.
“Good evening, Monsieur. Your compartment is the No. 1.”
He called to the porters and they wheeled their load halfway along the carriage on which the tin plates proclaimed its destination:
ISTANBUL TRIESTE CALAIS
“You are full up to-night, I hear?”
“It is incredible, Monsieur. All the world elects to travel to-night!”
“All the same you must find room for this gentleman here. He is a friend of mine. He can have the No. 16.”
“It is taken, Monsieur.”
“What? The No. 16?”
A glance of understanding passed between them, and the conductor smiled. He was a tall sallow man of middle age.
“But yes, Monsieur. As I told you, we are full—full—everywhere.”
“But what passes itself?” demanded M. Bouc angrily. “There is a conference somewhere? It is a party?”
“No, Monsieur. It is only chance. It just happens that many people have elected to travel to-night.”
M. Bouc made a clicking sound of annoyance.
“At Belgrade,” he said, “there will be the slip coach from Athens. There will also be the Bucharest-Paris coach. But we do not reach Belgrade until to-morrow evening. The problem is for to-night. There is no second-class berth free?”
“There is a second-class berth, Monsieur—”
“Well, then—”
“But it is a lady’s berth. there is already a German woman in the compartment—a lady’s maid.”
“Là- là, that is awkward,” said M. Bouc.
“Do not distress yourself, my friend,” said Poirot. “I must travel in an ordinary carriage.”
“Not at all. Not at all.” He turned once more to the conductor. “Everyone has arrived?”
“It is true,” said the man, “that there is one passenger who has not yet arrived.” He spoke slowly, with hesitation.
“But speak then!”
“No. 7 berth—a second-class. The gentleman has not yet come, and it is four minutes to nine.”
“Who is it?”
“An Englishman,” the conductor consulted his list. “A M. Harris.”
“A name of good omen,” said Poirot. “I read my Dickens. M. Harris he will not arrive.”
“Put Monsieur’s luggage in No. 7,” said M. Bouc. “If this M. Harris arrives we will tell him that he is too late—that berths cannot be retained so long—we will arrange the matter one way or another. What do I care for a M. Harris?”
“As Monsieur pleases,” said the conductor. He spoke to Poirot’s porter, directing him where to go. Then he stood aside from the steps to let Poirot enter the train.
“Tout à fait au bout, Monsieur,” he called. “The end compartment but one.”
Poirot passed along the corridor, a somewhat slow progress, since most of the people travelling were standing outside their carriages.
His polite “Pardons” were uttered with the regularity of clockwork. At last he reached the compartment indicated. Inside it, reaching up to a suitcase, was the tall young American of the Tokatlian.
He frowned as Poirot entered.
“Excuse me,” he said. “I think you’ve made a mistake.” Then, laboriously in French: “Je crois qua vous avez un erreur.”
Poirot replied in English. “You are Mr. Harris?”
“No, my name is MacQueen. I—”
But at that moment the voice of the Wagon Lit conductor spoke from over Poirot’s shoulder—an apologetic, rather breathless voice.
“There is no other berth on the train, Monsieur. The gentleman has to come in here.”
He was hauling up the corridor window as he spoke and began to lift in Poirot’s luggage.
Poirot noticed the apology in his tone with some amusement. Doubtless the man had been promised a good tip if he could keep the compartment for the sole use of the other traveller. However, even the most munificent of tips lose their effect when a Director of the Company is on board and issues his orders.
The conductor emerged from the compartment, having swung the suitcases up onto the racks.
“Voilà, Monsieur,” he said. “All is arranged. Yours is the upper berth, the No. 7. We start in one minute.”
He hurried off down the corridor. Poirot re-entered the compartment.
“A phenomenon I have seldom seen,” he said cheerfully. “A Wagon Lit conductor himself puts up the luggage! It is unheard of!”
His fellow traveller smiled. He had evidently got over his annoyance—had probably decided that it was no good to take the matter otherwise than philosophically. “The train’s remarkably full,” he said.
A whistle blew, there was a long melancholy cry from the engine. Both men stepped out into the corridor. Outside a voice shouted, “En voiture!”
“We’re off,” said MacQueen.
But they were not quite off. The whistle blew again.
“I say, sir,” said the young man suddenly. “If you’d rather have the lower berth—easier and all that—well, that’s all right by me.”
A likeable young fellow.
“No, no,” protested Poirot. “I would not deprive you—”
“That’s all right—”
“You are too amiable—”
Polite protests on both sides.
“It is for one night only,” explained Poirot. “At Belgrade—”
“Oh! I see. You’re getting out at Belgrade—”
“Not exactly. You see—”
There was a sudden jerk. Both men swung round to the window, looking out at the long lighted platform as it slid slowly past them.
The Orient Express had started on its three-day journey across Europe.
第二章 托凯琳旅馆
第二章　托凯琳旅馆             
    在托凯琳旅馆，波洛要了一个带浴室的房间，接着就朝看门人的写字台走过去，询问是否有他的信件。
    有他的三封信，还有一封电报。看到电报，他的眉毛略微扬了扬。这是意想不到的。
    他用他那惯常的灵巧、不慌不忙的姿势，拆开了电报。印刷体的字特别清晰醒目。
    “你在凯斯纳案中预言的发展线索意外出现请即回。”
    “真讨厌，”波洛恼火地嘟哝了。他朝时钟瞥了一眼。
    “今天晚上我得继续上路，”他对看门人说。“东方快车什么时候开出？”
    “九点，先生。”
    “你能给我订一个卧铺吗？”
    “没问题，先生，在这种时令不难订到。列车几乎是空的。要头等还是二等？”
    “头等。”
    “好的，先生。你打算到哪儿？”
    “到伦敦。”
    “好的，先生。我将为你购到一张去伦敦的车票并在伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢上预订一个卧铺。”
    波洛又朝时钟瞥了一眼。已经是七点五十分了。
    “吃饭来得及吗？”
    “不成问题，先生。”
    小个子比利时人点点头。他去退了他原来预订的房间，随后穿过门厅，朝餐厅走去。
    当他正把菜单交给侍者时，一只手放到了他的肩上。
    “啊，老朋友！这真是想不到的高兴事儿！”一个声音在他背后响起。
    说话的是个矮胖、上了年纪的男人，他的头发剪得象把刷子。他正快活地微笑着。
    波洛忽地跳了起来。
    “鲍克先生。”
    “波洛先生。”
    鲍克先生是比利时人，他是国际客车公司的董事，多年以前，就和这位前比利时警方的知名人物相识了。
    “这次你是远离家乡了吧，我亲爱的。”鲍克先生说。
    “在叙利亚有点事。”
    “那你这是回家了──什么时候走？”
    “今天晚上。”
    “好极了，我也今晚走。我是说，我要去洛桑，在那儿有些事要办。我估计，你是乘的东方快车吧？”
    “是的。我刚才请他们给我订个卧铺。原来打算在这儿呆几天，可是接到了一个电报，有要事叫我回伦敦。”
    “唉！”鲍克先生叹了口气。“要事──要事！可是你呀──你现在在你们那行中是处于登峰造极的地位了，我的老朋友！”
    “也许有那么一点点小小的成就。”波洛想使自己显得谦虚一点，可是明显没有成功。
    鲍克笑了起来。
    “我们以后还会再见面的。”他说。
    波洛接着大讲了一通不让汤沾上他的翘胡子的困难性。
    他完成了这一困难任务后，朝周围瞥了一眼，同时等候下一道菜。餐厅里只有五、六个人，而其中只有两个引起波洛的注意。
    这两个人坐在离他不远的一张桌子旁。年纪较轻的是那个看上去讨人喜欢的、三十来岁的青年人，显然是个美国人。然而，引起这位小个子侦探注意的并不是他，而是他的同伴。
    他是个六七十岁的男人。就近看去，他有一副慈善家的和蔼外表。他的稍微有点秃的头，他的圆圆的前额，微笑的嘴露出一排雪白的假牙，一切似乎都说明此人有一种乐善好施的品格。只有眼睛与这种推测不相符合。那对眼睛小而深陷，显得阴险狡诈。不仅如此。当此人对他的年轻同伴做了个手势，眼睛扫过这个房间时，他朝波洛注视了一会，而就在这刹那之间，眉宇间露出一种奇怪的恶意，而且在他的目光中有一种反常的紧张神情。
    接着，他站了起来。
    “付账，赫克托。”他说。
    他的嗓子有点沙哑，音质古怪，柔软，危险。
    当波洛和他的朋友在休息室里再度碰头的时候，另外那两人刚好打算离开旅馆。他们的行李正被送了下来。那个年轻人在监督着这一过程。过了一会，他打开玻璃门，说道：“全准备好了，雷切特先生。”
    上了年纪的人嘀咕了一声，表示同意，走了出去。
    “喂！”波洛说，“对这两个人你有什么看法？”
    “他们是美国人。”鲍克先生说。
    “毫无疑问是美国人。我的意思是，对他们的个性你有什么看法？”
    “那个年轻人似乎很讨人喜欢。”
    “另一个呢？”
    “老实告诉你吧，朋友，我才没有去注意他。他给了我一个不愉快的印象。你呢。”
    在回答以前，波洛停顿了一会。
    “在他经过我面前走进餐厅时，”他终于说，“我有一个古怪的印象。他仿佛是一头野兽经过我的身旁──你知道，是头野兽似的残酷的人，是个残酷的人！”
    “然而，他看上去完全是个最体面的人。”
    “正是！他的躯体──那笼子──件件都是最体面的──可是穿过这些栅栏，这头野兽就原形毕露了。”
    “这是你想象出来，老朋友。”鲍克先生说。
    “也许是这样。可是我没法去掉这种印象，总觉得有邪恶从我近旁经过。”
    “他是不是一位体面的美国绅士？”
    “好吧，”鲍克先生愉快地说，“也许是这样。在这个世界上，邪恶多得很哪。”
    就在这时候，门开了，看门人朝他们走了过来。他看上去忧虑不安，象是很抱歉。
    “实在离奇，先生，”他对波洛说，“车上的头等卧铺全卖光了。”
    “怎么！”鲍克先生叫了起来，“在这种时候？嗨，毫无疑问，一定是有什么旅行团──要不就是什么政治团体吧──？”
    “我不知道，先生，”看门人恭敬地转身对他说道，“不过情况就是这样。”
    “得了，得了，”鲍克先生地波洛说，“别担心，朋友。我们一定能安排好的。车上通常有个卧铺──十六号，是不订出去的。那是由列车员掌握的！”他微笑着随后朝时钟瞥了一睨。“喂，”他说道，“是动身的时候了。”
    在火车站，鲍克先生受到一个身穿褐色制服的开车员恭敬、热城的欢迎。
    “晚安，先生。你的房间是一号。”
    他叫来侍者。侍者半途接过他们的行李，用车子沿车厢推过，车厢上的铁皮牌子，标明了车子的目的地：
    伊斯坦布尔──的里雅斯德港──加来
    “听说，你们今晚这趟车满员了？”
    “实在不可思议，先生。全世界都决定乘今晚这趟车！”
    “尽管如此，你还是得给这位先生找个房间。他是我的朋友。他可以住在十六号。”
    “十六号卖出去了，先生。”
    “什么，十六号。”
    他们彼此会心地看了一眼，于是列车员也笑了。他是个高个子、脸色灰黄的中年男子。
    “是的，先生正象我告诉你的一样，我们这趟车无论哪里都挤得满满的──满满的。”
    “这是怎么回事？”鲍克先生恼火地追问道，“是什么地方开会吧？还是一个政治团体？”
    “不，先生。这仅仅是偶然的巧合。恰好许多人都决定乘今晚这趟车。”
    鲍克先生的舌头发出烦恼的啧啧声。
    “到贝尔格莱德，”他说，“会有一节从雅典来的滑脱车厢，还有一节布加勒斯特──巴黎车厢──但是明天傍晚以前，我们到不了贝尔格莱德。问题是今天晚上。没有空的二等卧铺吗？”
    “二等卧铺到是还有一个，先生──”
    “好吧，那就──”
    “可是，那张女客卧铺，房间里已经有一位德国女士──一个女佣人。”
    “嗨，嗨，那不方便。”鲍克先生说。
    “别伤脑筋了，朋友，”波洛说，“我就乘普通车厢得了。”
    “没关系，没关系，”他再一次转向列车员说，“所有的旅客都到了吗？”
    “确切的情况是，”那人说，“还有一位旅客没有到。”
    他犹犹豫豫，说得很慢。
    “说下去吧。”
    “是七号铺──二等的。这位先生还没来，现在已经是九点差四分了。”
    “这人是谁？”
    “一个英国人，”列车员查阅着他的旅客一览表，“叫哈里斯。”
    “这名字是个好兆头，”波洛说，“我读过我的狄更斯。哈里斯，此人不会来了。”
    “把这位先生的行李搬到七号去，”鲍克先生说。“要是这位哈里斯先生来的话，我们会告诉他，他来得太迟了──卧铺不可能保留得这么久──我们会设法把事情安排妥当的。
我还得为这位哈里斯先生管点什么呢？”
    “随先生的喜欢吧。”开车员说。
    他告诉给波洛搬行李的侍者，指点他送去的地方。
    然后，他站到车门踏脚板的一旁，让波洛上了车。
    “就在头上，”他喊道，“倒数第二间。”
    波洛沿通道走过，可走得比较慢，因为大多数旅客都站在他们的房间外面。
    他的有礼貌的“对不起”、“对不起”，象时钟一样有规律地发出，好容易才走到指定的房间。包房里，正在伸手拿皮箱的是托凯琳旅馆见过的那个高个子年轻美国人。
    一见波洛走了进去，他皱起了眉头。
    “对不起，”他说，“我想你是搞错了吧。”接着，又用法语费力地说：“我想你是搞错了吧。”
    波洛先生用英语作了回答。
    “你是哈里斯先生吗？”
    “不，我叫麦克昆。我──”
    可是就在这时候，列车员的声音从波洛的肩后发出。一种表示歉意的，相当气急的声音。
    “车上没有别的铺位了，先生。这位先生只好住在这儿啦。”
    说着，他用力拉起过道上的窗子，并且动手把波洛的行李拎了进去。
    波洛觉察到，在他那表示歉意的声音中，带有一点逗乐的味道。无疑的，此人原来一定答应过多给小费，要是他能保住这个房间独自一人用，而不让别的旅客进来的话。然而，当一位公司的董事在车子上，并且作了吩咐后，即使是最慷慨的小费，也无济于事了。
    列车员把箱子放到行李架上，走出包房。
    “好了，先生，”他说，“全安排好了。你的床位在上铺，是七号。再过一分钟就要开车了。”
    他沿过道匆匆离开了。波洛重新走进包房。
    “一个难得的奇迹，”他高兴地说。“列车员亲自放行李！从来没听说过！”
    他的旅伴笑了，显然，他已忘掉了他的不快──也许已经认定，对待这类事，还是随合一点的好。
    “这趟车特别地挤。”他说。
    汽笛拉响了，机车发出了一声令人忧伤的长啸。他们俩走出包房，来到过道里。
    外面传来一声喊叫：“上车！”
    “开车了，”麦克昆说。
    但是车并未真的开出，又响起了汽笛声。
    “我说，先生，”年轻人突然说道，“要是你想睡下铺──方便一点的话，那就听便吧，我没有关系。”
    一个讨人喜欢的年轻小伙子。
    “不，不，”波洛坚决表示，“我不能让你──”
    “没有关系──”
    “你真是太客气了──”
    双方都有礼貌地推让着。“反正只有一夜，”波洛解释说，“到贝尔格莱德──”
“哦，我明白了。你到贝尔络莱德下车──”“不完全如此。你知道──”车子猛地牵动了一下。两人都摇晃了一下，急忙拉住窗口，朝外看去，只见灯火通明的月台，从他们的旁边缓缓地滑过。东方快车开始了它为时三天的横贯欧洲的旅程。
3 POIROT REFUSES A CASE
3 POIROT REFUSES A CASE
M. Hercule Poirot was a little late in entering the luncheon-car on the following day. He had risen early, had breakfasted almost alone, and had spent the morning going over the notes of the case that was recalling him to London. He had seen little of his travelling companion.
M. Bouc, who was already seated, gated a greeting and summoned his friend to the empty place opposite him. Poirot sat down and soon found himself in the favoured position of being at the table which was served first and with the choicest morsels. The food, too, was unusually good.
It was not till they were eating a delicate cream cheese that M. Bouc allowed his attention to wander to matters other than nourishment. He was at the stage of a meal when one becomes philosophic.
“Ah!” he sighed. “If I had but the pen of a Balzac! I would depict this scene.” He waved a hand.
“It is an idea, that,” said Poirot.
“Ah, you agree? It has not been done, I think? And yet—it lends itself to romance, my friend. All around us are people, of all classes, of all nationalities, of all ages. For three days these people, these strangers to one another, are brought together. They sleep and eat under one roof, they cannot get away from each other. At the end of three days they part, they go their several ways, never perhaps to see each other again.”
“And yet,” said Poirot, “suppose an accident—”
“Ah, no, my friend—”
“From your point of view it would be regrettable, I agree. But nevertheless let us just for one moment suppose it. Then, perhaps, all these here are linked together—by death.”
“Some more wine,” said M. Bouc, hastily pouring it out. “You are morbid, mon cher. It is, perhaps the digestion.”
“It is true,” agreed Poirot, “that the food in Syria was not perhaps quite suited to my stomach.”
He sipped his wine. Then, leaning back, he ran his eye thoughtfully round the dining-car. There were thirteen people seated there and, as M. Bouc had said, of all classes and nationalities. He began to study them.
At the table opposite them were three men. They were, he guessed, single travellers graded and placed there by the unerring judgment of the restaurant attendants. A big swarthy Italian was picking his teeth with gusto. Opposite him a spare neat Englishman had the expressionless disapproving face of the well-trained servant. Next to the Englishman was a big American in a loud suit—possibly a commercial traveller.
“You’ve got to put it over big,” he was saying in a loud, nasal voice.
The Italian removed his toothpick to gesticulate with it freely.
“Sure,” he said. “That whatta I say alla de time.”
The Englishman looked out of the window and coughed.
Poirot’s eye passed on.
At a small table, sitting very upright, was one of the ugliest old ladies he had ever seen. It was an ugliness of distinction—it fascinated rather than repelled. She sat very upright. Round her neck was a collar of very large pearls which, improbable though it seemed, were real. Her hands were covered with rings. Her sable coat was pushed back on her shoulders. A very small and expensive black toque was hideously unbecoming to the yellow, toad-like face beneath it.
She was speaking now to the restaurant attendant in a clear, courteous, but completely autocratic tone.
“You will be sufficiently amiable to place in my compartment a bottle of mineral water and a large glass of orange juice. You will arrange that I shall have chicken cooked without sauces for dinner this evening—also some boiled fish.”
The attendant replied respectfully that it should be done.
She gave a slight gracious nod of the head and rose. Her glance caught Poirot’s and swept over him with the nonchalance of the uninterested aristocrat.
“That is Princess Dragomiroff,” said M. Bouc in a low tone. “She is a Russian. Her husband realised all his money before the Revolution and invested it abroad. She is extremely rich. A cosmopolitan.”
Poirot nodded. He had heard of Princess Dragomiroff.
“She is a personality,” said M. Bouc. “Ugly as sin but she makes herself felt. You agree?”
Poirot agreed.
At another of the large tables Mary Debenham was sitting with two other women. One of them was tall and middle-aged, in a plaid blouse and tweed skirt. She had a mass of faded yellow hair unbecomingly arranged in a large bun, wore glasses, and had a long mild amiable face rather like a sheep. She was listening to the third woman, a stout, pleasant-faced, elderly person who was talking in a slow clear monotone which showed no signs of pausing for breath or coming to a stop.
“—and so my daughter said, ‘Why,’ she said, ‘you just can’t apply American methods in this country. It’s natural to the folks here to be indolent,’ she said. ‘They just haven’t got any hustle in them—’ But all the same you’d be surprised to know what our college there is doing. They’ve got a fine staff of teachers. I guess there’s nothing like education. We’ve got to apply our Western ideals and teach the East to recognise them. My daughter says—”
The train plunged into a tunnel. The calm, monotonous voice was drowned.
At the next table, a small one, sat Colonel Arbuthnot—alone. His gaze was fixed upon the back of Mary Debenham’s head. They were not sitting together. Yet it could easily have been managed. Why?
Perhaps, Poirot thought, Mary Debenham had demurred. A governess learns to be careful. Appearances are important. A girl with her living to get has to be discreet.
His glance shifted to the other side of the carriage. At the far end, against the wall, was a middle-aged woman dressed in black with a broad, expressionless face. German or Scandinavian, he thought. Probably the German lady’s-maid.
Beyond her were a couple leaning forward and talking animatedly together. The man wore English clothes of loose tweed, but he was not English. Though only the back of his head was visible to Poirot, the shape of it and the set of the shoulders betrayed him. A big man, well made. He turned his head suddenly and Poirot saw his profile. A very handsome man of thirty-odd with a big fair moustache.
The woman opposite him was a mere girl—twenty at a guess. A tight-fitting little black coat and skirt, white satin blouse, small chic black toque perched at the fashionable outrageous angle. She had a beautiful foreign-looking face, dead white skin, large brown eyes, jet black hair. She was smoking a cigarette in a long holder. Her manicured hands had deep red nails. She wore one large emerald set in platinum. There was coquetry in her glance and voice.
“Elle est jolie—et chic,” murmured Poirot. “Husband and wife—eh?”
M. Bouc nodded. “Hungarian Embassy, I believe,” he said. “A handsome couple.”
There were only two more lunchers—Poirot’s fellow traveller MacQueen and his employer Mr. Ratchett. The latter sat facing Poirot, and for the second time Poirot studied that unprepossessing face, noting the false benevolence of the brow and the small, cruel eyes.
Doubtless M. Bouc saw a change in his friend’s expression.
“It is at your wild animal you look?” he asked.
Poirot nodded.
As his coffee was brought to him, M. Bouc rose to his feet. Having started before Poirot he had finished some time ago.
“I return to my compartment,” he said. “Come along presently and converse with me.”
“With pleasure.”
Poirot sipped his coffee and ordered a liqueur. The attendant was passing from table to table with his box of money, accepting payment for bills. The elderly American lady’s voice rose shrill and plaintive.
“My daughter said: ‘Take a book of food tickets and you’ll have no trouble—no trouble at all.’ Now, that isn’t so. Seems they have to have a ten per cent tip, and then there’s that bottle of mineral water—and a queer sort of water too. They didn’t have any Evian or Vichy, which seems queer to me.”
“It is—they must—how do you say?—serve the water of the country,” explained the sheep-faced lady.
“Well, it seems queer to me.” She looked distastefully at the heap of small change on the table in front of her. “Look at all this peculiar stuff he’s given me. Dinars or something. Just a lot of rubbish, it looks like! My daughter said—”
Mary Debenham pushed back her chair and left with a slight bow to the other two. Colonel Arbuthnot got up and followed her. Gathering up her despised money the American woman followed suit, followed by the other one like a sheep. The Hungarians had already departed. The restaurant car was empty save for Poirot and Ratchett and MacQueen.
Ratchett spoke to his companion, who got up and left the car. Then he rose himself, but instead of following MacQueen he dropped unexpectedly into the seat opposite Poirot.
“Can you oblige me with a light?” he said. His voice was soft—faintly nasal. “My name is Ratchett.”
Poirot bowed slightly. He slipped his hand into his pocket and produced a matchbox which he handed to the other man, who took it but did not strike a light.
“I think,” he went on, “that I have the pleasure of speaking to Mr. Hercule Poirot. Is that so?”
Poirot bowed again. “You have been correctly informed, Monsieur.”
The detective was conscious of those strange shrewd eyes summing him up before the other spoke again.
“In my country,” he said, “we come to the point quickly. Mr. Poirot, I want you to take on a job for me.”
Hercule Poirot’s eyebrows went up a trifle.
“My clientèle, Monsieur, is limited nowadays. I undertake very few cases.”
“Why, naturally, I understand that. But this, Mr. Poirot, means big money.” He repeated again in his soft, persuasive voice, “Big money.”
Hercule Poirot was silent a minute or two. Then he said: “What is it you wish me to do for you, Monsieur—er—Ratchett?”
“Mr. Poirot, I am a rich man—a very rich man. Men in that position have enemies. I have an enemy.”
“Only one enemy?”
“Just what do you mean by that question?” asked Ratchett sharply.
“Monsieur, in my experience when a man is in a position to have, as you say, enemies, then it does not usually resolve itself into one enemy only.”
Ratchett seemed relieved by—Poirot’s answer. He said quickly:
“Why, yes, I appreciate that point. Enemy or enemies—it doesn’t matter. What does matter is my safety.”
“Safety?”
“My life has been threatened, Mr. Poirot. Now I’m a man who can take pretty good care of himself.” From the pocket of his coat his hand brought a small automatic into sight for a moment. He continued grimly. “I don’t think I’m the kind of man to be caught napping. But, as I look at it, I might as well make assurance doubly sure. I fancy you’re the man for my money, Mr. Poirot. And remember—big money.”
Poirot looked at him thoughtfully for some minutes. His face was completely expressionless. The other could have had no clue as to what thoughts were passing in that mind.
“I regret, Monsieur,” he said at length, “that I cannot oblige you.”
The other looked at him shrewdly. “Name your figure, then,” he said.
Poirot shook his head.
“You do not understand, Monsieur. I have been very fortunate in my profession. I have made enough money to satisfy both my needs and my caprices. I take now only such cases as—interest me.”
“You’ve got a pretty good nerve,” said Ratchett. “Will twenty thousand dollars tempt you?”
“It will not.”
“If you’re holding out for more, you won’t get it. I know what a thing’s worth to me.”
“I, also, M. Ratchett.”
“What’s wrong with my proposition?”
Poirot rose. “If you will forgive me for being personal—I do not like your face, M. Ratchett,” he said.
And with that he left the restaurant car.
第三章 波洛拒绝接受
第三章　波洛拒绝接受             
    第二天，波洛先生去餐车吃午饭晚了一点。那天早上，他起得很早，早饭几乎是独自一人吃的。整个上午，他都用来仔细地再次阅读把他召回伦敦的那件案子的笔记。他差不多没有见到自己的旅伴。
    已经坐在桌边的鲍克先生，对自己的朋友作了一个欢迎的手势，请他坐到对面的空位子上。波洛一坐下来，立即发现自己坐在受到款待的席位上了，这张桌子第一个送菜，是最精美的菜肴。饭菜真是好得异乎寻常。
    直到他们吃着美味的干乳酪时，鲍克先生才把自己的注意力从饭菜转到闲聊上来。真是乐天饭菜香啊！
    “唉！”他叹了一口气说，“要是我有巴尔扎克的天才该多好啊！我就可以把这种景象描写一番了。”
    他挥了挥手。
    “这倒是一个主意。”波洛说。
    “哦，你赞同？我想，这还没描写过吧？不过──这适合写成传奇故事，我的朋友。我们周围的这些人，属于不同的阶级，不同的国家，有着不同的年龄。在定三天之中，这些人，这些互不相识的人，相聚在一起。他们睡、吃在同一个车顶下，他们彼此都不能离开。
而三天一过，他们又都分道扬镳，各奔前程，也许这一辈子再也不见不到了。”
    “不过，”波洛说，“假如出了事故──”
    “哦，不，我的朋友──”
    “从你看来，这令人遗憾，我同意。不过让我们暂且做这么个假设吧。那样，也许这儿所有的人都会联系在一起──被死亡联系在一起。”
    “再来点别的吧，”鲍克先生说着，慌忙倒酒。“你真疯了，我亲爱的。也许是消化不良吧。”
    “确实如此，”波洛表示同意。“叙利亚的饭食，我的胃不太适应。”
    他呷了一口酒，然后，往后一靠，若有所思地用目光把整个餐厅扫视了一圈。这儿坐着十三个人，而且正如鲍克先生说的那样，属于不同的阶级，不同的国家。他开始研究起他们来了。
    坐在他们对面一张桌子旁的是三个男人。他猜测，他们是单身旅客，这是凭着餐车侍者的正确判断，给分类安排在这里的。一个身材魁梧、皮肤黝黑的意大利人正在兴致勃勃地剔牙齿。他对面是个瘦小、端正的英国人，他有着一张受过良好训练的佣人的脸。英国人旁边是个大个人美国人，穿着一件花哨俗气的西装──可能是个旅行推销员。
    “你一定会会大大成功。”他带着很重的鼻音说着。
    意大利人拔出牙签，以便捏着它随意地做手势。
    “当然，”他说，“那这（只）是我说的时间问体（题）。”
    英国人朝窗外看着，一边还在咳嗽。
    波洛的目光继续扫过去。
    一张小餐桌旁，笔挺地坐着一位他从未见过的最最难看的老太太。特别的难看──与其说使人讨厌，不如说令人迷惑。她笔挺地坐着。脖子上挂着一串很大的珍珠，看上去似乎不大可能是真的。她的两手戴满戒指。黑貂皮外套向后推在肩上。一顶小小的、昂贵的黑色无边帽，和宁下面的那张焦黄的、癞蛤蟆似的脸，极不相配，显得十分难看。
    她正用一种清晰的、文雅的，然而十足专横的语调，在和餐车侍者讲话。
    “你应该十分厚道，在我的房间里放一瓶矿泉水和一大杯柑桔汁。你还得作好安排，今天的晚饭我要清炖小鸡──另外要一点清蒸鱼。”
    侍者恭恭敬敬地回答说：“一定照办。”
    她庄重地稍点了点头，站了起来。她的目光和波洛的相遇，她用一种无动于衷的贵妇人的冷漠，在他的身上扫了一眼。
    “那是德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，”鲍克先生低声说，“她是个俄国人。她的丈夫在革命前把一切都变卖成现款，拿到国外投资。他非常有钱。是个世界主义者。”
    波洛点点头，他已经听说过德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人。
    “她是个知名人物，”鲍克先生说，“丑得简直叫人恶心，可她还要使自己引人注目。
你有同感吗？”
    波洛表示同意。
    另一张大餐桌旁坐着玛丽•德贝汉和另外两个女人。其中有一个身材修长的中年妇女，穿着方格子的宽大短外套和花呢的裙子。她有一头极不相称地梳成一只大面包似的淡黄卷发，戴着眼镜，还有一张长长的、温柔和蔼的、活象绵羊的脸。她正在听第三个女人讲话。
那是个矮胖、笑容满面的、上了年纪的女人，她正用一种缓慢、清晰的平淡语调讲着，那语调，没有一点表明要停下来吸口气或者稍作停顿的迹象。
    “……因此我的女儿说了，‘嗨，’她说，‘你就是没法在这个国家采用美国的方法。
懒惰正是这儿的人的本性。’她说，‘他们身上没有一点儿干劲。’可是当了解到我们在那儿的学校正在做的工作，你还是会感到惊奇。他们有一批优秀的教师。我认为，没有比教育更重要的了。我们应该实现我们西方的理想，教导东方承认这些理想。我的女儿说──”
    列车冲进了隧道。平稳单调的声音被淹没了。
    邻近的一张小餐桌旁，坐着阿巴思诺特上校──独自一个。他的目光紧盯在玛丽•德贝汉的后脑勺上。他们没有坐在一起。而这本来是很容易办到的。为什么要这样呢？
    波洛想，也许，玛丽•德贝汉不愿意。一个家庭教师不会忘记凡事要小心谨慎，举止仪表很重要。以此来谋生的姑娘是不得不谨慎的。
    他的目光移到了车厢的另一边。在较远的那头，靠壁，是一位中年妇女，穿着黑色的衣服，有一张呆板的宽宽的脸。是德国人，或者是斯堪的纳维亚人。他想，可能是一个德国女佣人。
    在她的后面，坐着男女一对，他们正往前探着身子，在一起热烈交谈。男的穿着一身宽松的花呢英国服装──但他不是英国人。虽然波洛只看到他的后脑勺，但是凭它的体态，以及那肩膀的样子，可以看出，是个大个子，身材匀称。他突然转过头来，于是波洛看到了他的侧面。是个俊美的男人，三十多岁，有着一大抹漂亮的大胡子。
    在他对面的女人，还不过是个姑娘──估计二十来岁。穿着很紧身的短小的黑色上装和裙子，白缎子的外套，一顶时髦的小小的黑色无边帽，搭在那流行的、叫人看不惯的角度上。她有一张美丽的、看上去象外国人的脸蛋，灰白色的皮肤，褐色的大眼睛，乌黑发亮的头发。她正在用一只长长的烟嘴吸着烟。双手修过的指甲染成深红。戴着一只镶嵌着绿宝石的白我戒指。在她眉目和音容中，都有着一种卖弄风情的媚态。
    “她委讨人喜欢──很漂亮，”波洛低声说，“一对夫妻──呃？”
    鲍克先生点点头。
    “匈牙利大使馆的，我想是，”他说，“漂亮的一对。”
    在吃早饭的还有两个人──波洛的同室这么样麦克昆和他的主人雷切特先生后者面朝波洛坐着，于是波洛第二次研究起那张不讨人喜欢的胸来，特别注意那眉宇间和凶残的小眼睛中的假慈悲。
    无鲍克先生已经看出他的朋友表情的变化。
    “你是在看你的野兽吧？”他问道。
    波洛点点头。
    当咖啡端上时，鲍克先生站了起来。波洛进来之前，他就开始吃了，现在已吃完一些时候了。
    “我回房间去了，”他说，“等会儿来和我谈谈吧。”
    “十分乐意。”
    波洛呷着咖啡，又要了一杯甜酒。侍者捧着一个钱盒，从一张餐桌起到另一张餐桌，在收账。那位上了年纪的美国太太的声音响起来了，尖锐刺耳，充满哀怨。
    “我的女儿说，‘买上一本长期就餐券，那你就省事了──一点不费事。’可是，现在没有这样的券。好象得给他们百分之十的小费，才会给瓶矿泉水──一瓶冒牌货也是这样。
他们没有艾芬和维奇，这倒怪了。”
    “正因为这样，他们必须──如你所说──供应这个地方的水了。”羊脸太太解释说。
    “是啊，我觉得奇怪。”她厌恶地看着面前餐桌上的一堆零钱。“瞧，他给我的这些奇形怪状的废物。第纳尔还是什么的。看起来就象是许多垃圾。我的女儿说过──”
    玛丽•德贝汉往后推开自己的椅子，朝另外两人微微点了点头，起了。阿巴思诺特上校也站起来，跟在她后面出去了。美国老太太收起她看不起的钱，在羊脸太太的陪同下，也照样走了。那对匈牙利人已经离去。餐车里只剩下波洛先生和雷切特，还有麦克昆。
    雷切特和自己的同伴讲了几句，麦克昆就站起身来，离开了餐车。接着，他自己也站起来，但他没有随着麦克昆一起出去，而是出乎意料地坐到波洛对面的椅子上。
    “能借个火吗？”他说。他的声音柔和──略带鼻音。“我叫雷切特。”
    波洛稍微点了点头。他把手伸进口袋，取出一盒火柴，递给那人。那人接过火柴，但没有擦。
    “我想，”他接下去说，“我是有幸在和赫卡尔•波洛先生谈话吧。是那样么？”
    波洛又点了点头。
    “你了解得正确，先生。”
    在那人再次讲话之前，侦探就意识到那双在估量着他的阴冷、厉害的眼睛。
    “在我们的国家里，”他说，“习惯于开门见山。波洛先生，我要你为我担任一项职务。”
    波洛稍微扬起了双眉。
    “先生，现在我的顾客是有限制的。我只能承担很少几桩案件。”
    “嗨，当然，这我知道。可是这一桩，波洛先生，意味着一大笔钱。”他用他那柔和的劝诱的声音再次重复说，“一大笔钱。”
    波洛沉默了一、两分钟，然后说：“你希望我为你做的是什么呢，雷切特先生？”
    “波洛先生，我是个有钱人──一个非常有钱的人。处在这种地位的人总是有敌人的。
我也有一个敌人。”
    “只有一个敌人？”
    “你提这问题是什么意思呢？”雷切特先生尖锐地问道。
    “先生，根据我的经验，当一个人处于象你所说的有敌人的情况时，那通常是不会只有一个敌人的。”
    波洛的回答似乎使雷切特感到宽慰。他赶忙说：“呃──对，我欣赏你这个观点。一个敌人，或者是好多个敌人，过都没有关系，要紧的是我的安全。”
    “安全？”
    “我的生命已经受到威胁，波洛先生。要知道，我是一个颇能爱护自己的人。”他伸手从上衣口袋里掏出一支小小的自动手枪，展示了一下。他继续冷酷地说：“我认为我不是那种疏忽大意的人。但是，当我看到这东西时，我就更要使人的安全得到双倍的保证。我想，你是可以得到我的钱的适当人选，波洛先生。请记住──一大笔钱。”
    波洛若有所思地朝他打量了几分钟。他的脸毫无表情。没法捉摸到他的脑子里正有些什么想法。
    “我很抱歉，先生，”他最后终于说。“我不能答应你的要求。”
    那人精明地朝他打量着。
    “还是说个价钱吧。”他说。
    波波摇摇头。
    “你不了解，先生。我在我的职业方面非常走运。我已经挣了很多钱，足够满足我的需要和任性了。我现在只接受我感兴趣的那案件。”
    “你这人确实沉得住气，”雷切特说，“两万美元能使你感兴趣吗？”
    “不能。”
    “要是你坚持非多要不可，那你就得不到它了。我知道什么样的事情对我来说是值得的。”
    “我也是──雷切特先生。”
    “我的建议有什么不对吗？”
    波洛站了起来。
    “要是你能原谅我说话唐突的话──那我说，我不喜欢你的这副尊容，雷切特先生。”
    说着，他就离开了餐车。
4 A CRY IN THE NIGHT
4 A CRY IN THE NIGHT
The Simplon Orient Express arrived at Belgrade at a quarter to nine that evening. It was not due to depart again until 9.15, so Poirot descended to the platform. He did not, however, remain there long. The cold was bitter, and though the platform itself was protected, heavy snow was falling outside. He returned to his compartment. The conductor, who was on the platform stamping his feet and waving his arms to keep warm, spoke to him.
“Your valises have been moved, Monsieur. To the compartment No. 1, the compartment of M. Bouc.”
“But where is Monsieur Bouc, then?”
“He has moved into the coach from Athens which has just been put on.”
Poirot went in search of his friend. M. Bouc waved his protestations aside.
“It is nothing. It is nothing. It is more convenient like this. You are going through to England, so it is better that you should stay in the through coach to Calais. Me, I am very well here. It is most peaceful. This coach is empty save for myself and one little Greek doctor. Ah! my friend, what a night! They say there has not been so much snow for years. Let us hope we shall not be held up. I am not too happy about it, I can tell you.”
At 9.15 punctually the train pulled out of the station, and shortly afterwards Poirot got up, said good night to his friend, and made his way along the corridor back into his own coach which was in front next to the dining-car.
On this, the second day of the journey, barriers were breaking down. Colonel Arbuthnot was standing at the door of his compartment talking to MacQueen. When MacQueen saw Poirot he broke off something he was saying. He looked very much surprised.
“Why,” he cried, “I thought you’d left us. You said you were getting off at Belgrade.”
“You misunderstood me,” said Poirot, smiling. “I remember now, the train started from Stamboul just as we were talking about it.”
“But, man, your baggage. It’s gone.”
“It has been moved into another compartment, that is all.”
“Oh! I see.”
He resumed his conversation with Arbuthnot, and Poirot passed on down the corridor.
Two doors from his own compartment, the elderly American, Mrs. Hubbard, was standing talking to the sheep-like lady, who was a Swede. Mrs. Hubbard was pressing a magazine on the other.
“No, do take it, my dear,” she said. “I’ve got plenty of other things to read. My, isn’t the cold something frightful?” She nodded amicably to Poirot.
“You are most kind,” said the Swedish lady.
“Not at all. I hope you’ll sleep well and that your head will be better in the morning.”
“It is the cold only. I make now myself a cup of tea.”
“Have you got some aspirin? Are you sure now? I’ve got plenty. Well, good night, my dear.”
She turned to Poirot conversationally as the other woman departed.
“Poor creature, she’s a Swede. As far as I can make out she’s a kind of missionary. A teaching one. A nice creature, but doesn’t talk much English. She was most interested in what I told her about my daughter.”
Poirot, by now, knew all about Mrs. Hubbard’s daughter. Everyone on the train who could understand English did! How she and her husband were on the staff of a big American college in Smyrna, and how this was Mrs. Hubbard’s first journey to the East, and what she thought of the Turks and their slipshod ways and the condition of their roads.
The door next to them opened and the thin pale manservant stepped out. Inside, Poirot caught a glimpse of Mr. Ratchett sitting up in bed. He saw Poirot and his face changed, darkening with anger. Then the door was shut.
Mrs. Hubbard drew Poirot a little wide.
“You know, I’m dead scared of that man. Oh! not the valet—the other. His master. Master, indeed! There’s something wrong about that man. My daughter always says I’m very intuitive. ‘When Mamma gets a hunch, she’s dead right,’ that’s what my daughter says. And I’ve got a hunch about that man. He’s next door to me and I don’t like it. I put my grips against the communicating door last night. I thought I heard him trying the handle. Duo you know, I shouldn’t be a bit surprised if that man turned out to be a murderer—one of these train robbers you read about. I daresay I’m foolish, but there it is. I’m absolutely scared to death of the man! My daughter said I’d have an easy journey, but somehow I don’t feel happy about it. It may be foolish, but I feel as if anything might happen—anything at all. And how that nice young fellow can bear to be his secretary, I can’t think.”
Colonel Arbuthnot and MacQueen were coming towards them down the corridor.
“Come into my carriage,” MacQueen was saying. “It isn’t made up for the night yet. Now what I want to get right about your policy in India is this—”
The two men passed and went on down the corridor to MacQueen’s carriage.
Mrs. Hubbard said good night to Poirot. “I guess I’ll go right to bed and read,” she said. “Good night.”
“Good night, Madame.”
Poirot passed into his own compartment, which was the next one beyond Ratchett’s. He undressed and got into bed, read for about half an hour and then turned out the light.
He awoke some hours later, awoke with a start. He knew what it was that had wakened him—a loud groan, almost a cry, somewhere close at hand. At the same moment the ting of a bell sounded sharply.
Poirot sat up and switched on the light. He noticed that the train was at a standstill—presumably at a station.
That cry had startled him. He remembered that it was Ratchett who had the next compartment. He got out of bed and opened the door just as the Wagon Lit conductor came hurrying along the corridor and knocked on Ratchett’s door. Poirot kept his door open a crack and watched. The conductor tapped a second time. A bell rang and a light showed over another door farther down. The conductor glanced over his shoulder. At the same moment a voice from within the next compartment called out: “Ce n’est rien. Je me suis trompé.”
“Bien, Monsieur.” The conductor scurried off again, to knock at the door where the light was showing.
Poirot returned to bed, his mind relieved, and switched off the light. He glanced at his watch. It was just twenty-three minutes to one.
第四章 深夜的叫声
第四章　深夜的叫声             
    那天晚上八点三刻，东方快车抵达贝尔格莱德。列车预定要在九点十五分再开出，因而波洛就下车到了月台上。然而，他下去没有呆多久。天冷得厉害，虽然月台本身是遮盖着的，可外面正在下着鹅毛大雪。他走回自己的包房。正在月台上跺脚搓手取暧的列车员，对着他说：“你的行李已经搬走了，先生，搬到一号包房鲍克先生的房间去了。”
    “那么，鲍克先生到哪儿去了？”
    “他搬到刚挂上的雅典来的车厢去了。”
    波洛找到了自己的朋友。鲍克先生对他的异议置之不理。
    “这没有什么。没有什么。这样比较合适。你是要直接去英国的，因此，你应该是待在直达加来的车厢上比较好。嗨呀，我在这儿好极了。最最安静。这节车厢里只有我和一位小个子希腊大夫。嗨！我的朋友，多好的夜啊！人们说这儿多年没下过这么大的雪了。但愿我们不会被雪所阻吧。我可以告诉你，我对此可不太乐意。”
    九点十五分，列车准时驶出车站，过后不久，波洛站了起来，和自己的朋友道了晚安，就沿过道走回自己的车厢，这节车厢在前面，紧接餐车。
    在这旅程的第二天，各种隔阂正在打破。阿巴思诺特上校正站在自己的房门和麦克昆谈天。
    麦克昆一见波洛，立刻就中止了他正在说的话，显得十分惊奇。
    “嘿，”他叫了起来，“我以为你已经离开我们了。你说你要在贝尔格莱德下车的呀。”
    “你误解我的意思啦，”波洛微笑着说，“我还记得，说这话时，火车正开出伊斯坦布尔。”
    “可是，老兄，你的行李──行李拿走了呀。”
    “我搬到另一个包房去了──如此而已。”
    “哦，我明白了。”
    他又继续和阿巴思诺特谈起话来，波洛沿过道走着。
    在离他包房两道门的地方，上了年纪的美国女士，哈伯德太太，正站着和那位绵羊脸的太太谈话──她是个瑞典人。哈伯德太太正递给那人一本杂志。
    “都拿去吧，我亲爱的，”她说，“我带的东西还多着哪。哎呀，感冒是很讨厌的！”
她友好地朝波洛点了点头。
    “你真好。”瑞典太太说。
    “别客气。我希望你好好睡上一觉，那样，明天早晨你的头痛就会好一些了。”
    “只是天气太冷了。现在我得给自己去弄杯茶喝。”
    “你有阿司匹林没有？真的有吗，呃？我这里有的是。好吧，晚安，我亲爱的。”
    那个人离开后，她就转身对波洛讲了起来。
    “可怜的人。她是个瑞典人。据我了解，她是个教士一样的人──一种搞教学的传教士。一个好人，可是不大会说英语。她最感兴趣的是听我给她讲我女儿的事。”
    波洛现在已经知道哈伯德太太女儿的全部情况了。车上每一个懂英语的人都知道！知道她和她的丈夫都是士麦那一所很大的美国人办的大学里工作的。知道这是哈伯德太太的第一次来东方旅行，以及她对土耳其人，对他们不整洁的道路和铁路状况的看法。
    他们近旁的那个门打开了，那个瘦瘦的、脸色苍白的男佣人从里面起了出来。波洛一眼瞥见里面的雷切特先生正端坐在床上。他看见波洛，脸色都变了，气得沉下了脸。接着门就关上了。
    “你知道，我被那个人吓坏了。哦，不是那个佣人──而是另一个──他的主人。主人！真的！他有点不正常。我的女儿经常说，我这人非常直觉。妈妈的预感总是很准确的，这是我女儿说的。对那人，我就有个预感。他住在我的隔壁，我很不喜欢。昨天晚上，我把我的几只旅行包都堵在和他房间相通的门边。我好象总听到他在拧那门把手。要知道，要是他是个杀人凶手，是个那种你有书上读到过的火车强盗的话，我一点也不会感到惊奇的。我这个人也许使人感到可笑。可的确是这样的。我被那人吓坏了！我女儿说，我这次旅行会是很适意的，可是不知怎么的我总感到有点不愉快。这也许很可笑，但是我总觉得什么事情都可能发生。完全有可能发生。我真不能想象，那个很好的年轻小伙子，去做他的私人秘书，怎么能受得了。”
    阿巴思诺特上校和麦克昆，正沿着过道，朝他们这边走过来。
    “到我的包房去吧，”麦克昆说着，“今晚上还没谈够呢。我想搞清楚你的印度政策是──”
    他们俩走了过去，继续沿着过道走向麦克昆的房间。
    哈伯德太太向波洛道了晚安。
    “我想，我得上床去读点书去了，”她说，“晚安。”
    “晚安，太太。”
    波洛走进自己的房间，就是雷切特的那边的一间。他脱衣躺在床上，看了半小时书，然后关了灯。
    几个小时以后，他醒过来了，是被惊醒的。他知道，是什么惊醒了他──是一声很响的呻吟，几乎是一声叫喊，就在附近的什么地方。在这同一蛤刻，响起了急促的铃声。
    波洛翻身坐了起来，打开灯。他发现列车停着──可能到站了。
    那叫声使他吃了一惊。他想起，隔壁的包房是雷切特。他下了床，打开房门，这时正好列车员急匆匆地沿着过道走过来，他敲了敲雷切特的房门。波洛让自己的门开着一条缝，窥视着。列车员又敲了第二次。稍远处的另一个门里也响起了铃声并亮起灯光。列车员扭头瞥了一眼。
    在这同一时刻，从隔壁的房里传来一个声音，用的是法语：“没什么事，是我搞错了。”
    “是，先生。列车员又匆匆跑开，去敲亮着灯的包房的门。
    波洛回到床上，他宽心了，于是关了灯。他看了看自己的手表。正好一点差二十三分。
5 THE CRIME
5 THE CRIME
He found it difficult to go to sleep again at once. For one thing he missed the motion of the train. If it was a station outside, it was curiously quiet. By contrast the noises on the train seemed unusually loud. He could hear Ratchett moving about next door—a click as he pulled down the washbasin, the sound of the tap running, a splashing noise, then another click as the basin shut to again. Footsteps passed up the corridor outside, the shuffling footsteps of someone in bedroom slippers.
Hercule Poirot lay awake staring at the ceiling. Why was the station outside so silent? His throat felt dry. He had forgotten to ask for his usual bottle of mineral water. He looked at his watch again. Just after a quarter past one. He would ring for the conductor and ask for some mineral water. His finger went out to the bell, but he paused as in the stillness he heard a ting. The man couldn’t answer every bell at once.
Ting. ... Ting. ... Ting. ...
It sounded again and again. Where was the man? Somebody was getting impatient.
Ti-i-i-ing!
Whoever it was, was keeping a finger solidly on the push-button.
Suddenly with a rush, his footsteps echoing up the aisle, the man came. He knocked at a door not far from Poirot’s own.
Then came voices—the conductor’s, deferential, apologetic; and a woman’s, insistent and voluble.
Mrs. Hubbard!
Poirot smiled to himself.
The altercation—if it was one—went on for some time. Its proportions were ninety per cent of Mrs. Hubbard’s to a soothing ten per cent of the conductor’s. Finally the matter seemed to be adjusted. Poirot heard distinctly a “Bonne nuit, Madame,” and a closing door.
He pressed his own finger on the bell.
The conductor arrived promptly. He looked hot and worried.
“De l’eau minérale, s’il vous Pla?t.”
“Bien, Monsieur.” Perhaps a twinkle in Poirot’s eye led him to unburden himself. “La dame américaine—”
“Yes?”
He wiped his forehead. “Imagine to yourself the time I have had with her! She insists—but insists—that there is a man in her compartment! Figure to yourself, Monsieur. In a space of this size.” He swept a hand round. “Where would he conceal himself? I argue with her. I point out that it is impossible. She insists. She woke up, and there was a man there. And how, I ask, did he get out and leave the door bolted behind him? But she will not listen to reason. As though there were not enough to worry us already. This snow—”
“Snow?”
“But yes, Monsieur. Monsieur has not noticed? The train has stopped. We have run into a snowdrift. Heaven knows how long we shall be here. I remember once being snowed up for seven days.”
“Where are we?”
“Between Vincovci and Brod.”
“Là-là,” said Poirot vexedly.
The man withdrew and returned with the water.
“Bon soir, Monsieur.”
Poirot drank a glass of water and composed himself to sleep.
He was just dropping off when something again woke him. This time it was as though something heavy had fallen with a thud against the door.
He sprang up, opened it and looked out. Nothing. But to his right, some distance down the corridor, a woman wrapped in a scarlet kimono was retreating from him. At the other end, sitting on his little seat, the conductor was entering up figures on large sheets of paper. Everything was deathly quiet.
“Decidedly I suffer from the nerves,” said Poirot and retired to bed again. This time he slept till morning.
When he awoke the train was still at a standstill. He raised a blind and looked out. Heavy banks of snow surrounded the train.
He glanced at his watch and saw that it was past nine o’clock.
At a quarter to ten, neat, spruce and dandified as ever, he made his way to the restaurant car, where a chorus of woe was going on.
Any barriers there might have been between the passengers had now quite broken down. All were united by a common misfortune. Mrs. Hubbard was loudest in her lamentations.
“My daughter said it would be the easiest way in the world. Just sit in the train until I got to Parrus. And now we may be here for days and days,” she wailed. “And my boat sails day after to-morrow. How am I going to catch it now? Why, I can’t even wire to cancel my passage. I’m just too mad to talk about it!”
The Italian said that he had urgent business himself in Milan. The large American said that that was “too bad, Ma’am,” and soothingly expressed a hope that the train might make up time.
“My sister—her children wait me,” said the Swedish lady, and wept. “I get no word to them. What they think? They will say bad things have happen to me.”
“How long shall we be here?” demanded Mary Debenham. “Doesn’t anybody know?”
Her voice sounded impatient, but Poirot noted that there were no signs of that almost feverish anxiety which she had displayed during the check to the Taurus Express.
Mrs. Hubbard was off again.
“There isn’t anybody knows a thing on this train. And nobody’s trying to do anything. Just a pack of useless foreigners. Why, if this were at home, there’d be someone at least trying to do something!”
Arbuthnot turned to Poirot and spoke in careful British French.
“Vous êtes un directeur de la ligne, je crois, Monsieur. Vous pouvez nous dire—”
Smiling, Poirot corrected him.
“No, no,” he said in English. “It is not I. You confound me with my friend, M. Bouc.”
“Oh, I’m sorry”
“Not at all. It is most natural. I am now in the compartment that he had formerly.”
M. Bouc was not present in the restaurant car. Poirot looked about to notice who else was absent.
Princess Dragomiroff was missing, and the Hungarian couple. Also Ratchett, his valet, and the German lady’s-maid.
The Swedish lady wiped her eyes.
“I am foolish,” she said. “I am bad to cry. All is for the best, whatever happen.”
This Christian spirit, however, was far from being shared.
“That’s all very well,” said MacQueen restlessly. “We may be here for days.”
“What is this country anyway?” demanded Mrs. Hubbard tearfully.
On being told it was Jugo-Slavia, she said: “Oh! one of these Balkan things. What can you expect?”
“You are the only patient one, Mademoiselle,” said Poirot to Miss Debenham.
She shrugged her shoulders slightly. “What can one do?”
“You are a philosopher, Mademoiselle.”
“That implies a detached attitude. I think my attitude is more selfish. I have learned to save myself useless emotion.”
She was speaking more to herself than to him. She was not even looking at him. Her gaze went past him, out of the window to where the snow lay in heavy masses.
“You are a strong character, Mademoiselle,” said Poirot gently. “You are, I think, the strongest character amongst us.”
“Oh! no. No, indeed. I know one far, far stronger than I am.”
“And that is—?”
She seemed suddenly to come to herself, to realise that she was talking to a stranger and foreigner, with whom, until this morning, she had exchanged only half a dozen sentences.
She laughed, a polite but estranging laugh.
“Well—that old lady, for instance. You have probably noticed her. A very ugly old lady but rather fascinating. She has only to lift a little finger and ask for something in a polite voice—and the whole train runs.”
“It runs also for my friend M. Bouc,” said Poirot. “But that is because he is a director of the line, not because he has a strong character.”
Mary Debenham smiled.
The morning wore away. Several people, Poirot amongst them, remained in the dining-car. The communal life was felt, at the moment, to pass the time better. He heard a good deal more about Mrs. Hubbard’s daughter, and he heard the lifelong habits of Mr. Hubbard, deceased, from his rising in the morning and commencing breakfast with a cereal to his final rest at night in the bed-socks that Mrs. Hubbard herself had been in the habit of knitting for him.
It was when he was listening to a confused account of the missionary aims of the Swedish lady that one of the Wagon Lit conductors came into the car and stood at his elbow.
“Pardon, Monsieur.”
“Yes?”
“The compliments of M. Bouc, and he would be glad if you would be so kind as to come to him for a few minutes.”
Poirot rose, uttered excuses to the Swedish lady and followed the man out of the dining-car. It was not his own conductor, but a big fair man.
He followed his guide down the corridor of his own carriage and along the corridor of the next one. The man tapped at a door, then stood aside to let Poirot enter.
The compartment was not M. Bouc’s own. It was a second-class one—chosen presumably because of its slightly larger size. It certainly gave the impression of being crowded.
M. Bouc himself was sitting on the small seat in the opposite corner. In the corner next the window, facing him, was a small dark man looking out at the snow. Standing up and quite preventing Poirot from advancing any farther were a big man in blue uniform (the chef de train) and his own Wagon Lit conductor.
“Ah! my good friend,” cried M. Bouc. “Come in. We have need of you.”
The little man in the window shifted along the seat, and Poirot squeezed past: the other two men and sat down facing his friend.
The expression on M. Bouc’s face gave him, as he would have expressed it, furiously to think. It was clear that something out of the common had happened.
“What has occurred?” he asked.
“You may well ask that. First this snow-this stoppage. And now—”
He paused—and a sort of strangled gasp came from the Wagon Lit conductor.
“And now what?”
“And now a passenger lies dead in his berth—stabbed.”
M. Bouc spoke with a kind of calm desperation.
“A passenger? Which passenger?”
“An American. A man called—called—” he consulted some notes in front of him. “Ratchett. That is right—Ratchett?”
“Yes, Monsieur,” the Wagon Lit man gulped.
Poirot looked at him. He was as white as chalk.
“You had better let that man sit down,” he said. “He may faint otherwise.”
The chef de train moved slightly and the Wagon Lit man sank down in the corner and buried his face in his hands.
“Brr!” said Poirot. “This is serious!”
“Certainly it is serious. To begin with, a murder—that in itself is a calamity of the first water. But not only that, the circumstances are unusual. Here we are, brought to a standstill. We may be here for hours—and not only hours—days! Another circumstance—passing through most countries we have the police of that country on the train. But in Jugo-Slavia, no. You comprehend?”
“It is a position of great difficulty,” said Poirot.
“There is worse to come. Dr. Constantine—I forgot, I have not introduced you. Dr. Constantine, M. Poirot.”
The little dark man bowed, and Poirot returned the bow.
“Dr. Constantine is of the opinion that death occurred at about 1 A.M.”
“It is difficult to speak exactly in these matters,” said the doctor, “but I think I can say definitely that death occurred between midnight and two in the morning.”
“When was this M. Ratchett last seen alive?” asked Poirot.
“He is known to have been alive at about twenty minutes to one, when he spoke to the conductor,” said M. Bouc.
“That is quite correct,” said Poirot. “I myself heard what passed. That is the last thing known?”
“Yes.”
Poirot turned toward the doctor, who continued.
“The window of M. Ratchett’s compartment was found wide open, leading one to suppose that the murderer escaped that way. But in my opinion that open window is a blind. Anyone departing that way would have left distinct traces in the snow. There were none.”
“The crime was discovered—when?” asked Poirot.
“Michel!”
The Wagon Lit conductor sat up. His face still looked pale and frightened.
“Tell this gentleman exactly what occurred,” ordered M. Bouc.
The man spoke somewhat jerkily.
“The valet of this M. Ratchett, he tapped several times at the door this morning. There was no answer. Then, half an hour ago, the restaurant car attendant came. He wanted to know if Monsieur was taking déjeuner. It was eleven o’clock, you comprehend.
“I open the door for him with my key. But there is a chain, too, and that is fastened. There is no answer and it is very still in there, and cold—but cold. With the window open and snow drifting in. I thought the gentleman had had a fit, perhaps. I got the chef de train. We broke the chain and went in. He was—Ah! c’était terrible!”
He buried his face in his hands again.
“The door was locked and chained on the inside,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “It was not suicide—eh?”
The Greek doctor gave a sardonic laugh. “Does a man who commits suicide stab himself in ten—twelve—fifteen places?” he asked.
Poirot’s eyes opened. “That is great ferocity,” he said.
“It is a woman,” said the chef de train, speaking for the first time. “Depend upon it, it was a woman. Only a woman would stab like that.”
Dr. Constantine screwed up his face thoughtfully.
“She must have been a very strong woman,” he said. “It is not my desire to speak technically—that is only confusing; but I can assure you that one or two of the blows were delivered with such force as to drive them through hard belts of bone and muscle.”
“It was clearly not a scientific crime,” said Poirot.
“It was most unscientific,” returned Dr. Constantine. “The blows seem to have been delivered haphazard and at random. Some have glanced off, doing hardly any damage. It is as though somebody had shut his eyes and then in a frenzy struck blindly again and again.”
“C’est une femme,” said the chef de train again. “Women are like that. When they are enraged they have great strength.” He nodded so sagely that everyone suspected a personal experience of his own.
“I have, perhaps, something to contribute to your store of knowledge,” said Poirot. “M. Ratchett spoke to me yesterday. He told me, as far as I was able to understand him, that he was in danger of his life.”
“ ‘Bumped off’—that is the American expression, is it not?” asked M. Bouc. “Then it is not a woman. It is a ‘gangster’ or a ‘gunman.’ ”
The chef de train looked pained at seeing his theory come to nought.
“If so,” said Poirot, “it seems to have been done very amateurishly.” His tone expressed professional disapproval.
“There is a large American on the train,.” said M. Bouc, pursuing his idea. “A common-looking man with terrible clothes. He chews the gum, which I believe is not done in good circles. You know whom I mean?”
The Wagon Lit conductor to whom he had appealed nodded.
“Oui, Monsieur, the No. 16. But it cannot have been he. I should have seen him enter or leave the compartment.”
“You might not. You might not. But we will go into that presently. The question is, what to do?” He looked at Poirot.
Poirot looked back at him.
“Come, my friend,” said M. Bouc. “You comprehend what I am about to ask of you. I know your powers. Take command of this investigation! No, no, do not refuse. See, to us it is serious—I speak for the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons Lits. By the time the Jugo-Slavian police arrive, how simple if we can present them with the solution! Otherwise delays, annoyances, a million and one inconveniences. Perhaps, who knows, serious annoyance to innocent persons. Instead—you solve the mystery! We say, ‘A murder has occurred—this is the criminal!’”
“And suppose I do not solve it?”
“Ah, mon cher!” M. Bouc’s voice became positively caressing. “I know your reputation. I know something of your methods. This is the ideal case for you. To look up the antecedents of all these people, to discover their bona fides—all that takes time and endless inconvenience. But have I not heard you say often that to solve a case a man has only to lie back in his chair and think? Do that. Interview the passengers on the train, view the body, examine what clues there are, and then—well, I have faith in you! I am assured that it is no idle boast of yours. Lie back and think—use (as I have heard you say so often) the little grey cells of the mind—and you will know!”
He leaned forward, looking affectionately at the detective.
“Your faith touches me, my friend,” said Poirot emotionally. “As you say, this cannot be a difficult case. I myself last night—but we will not speak of that now. In truth, this problem intrigues me. I was reflecting, not half an hour ago, that many hours of boredom lay ahead whilst we are stuck here. And now—a problem lies ready to my hand.”
“You accept then?” said M. Bouc eagerly.
“C’est entendu. You place the matter in my hands.”
“Good—we are all at your service.”
“To begin with, I should like a plan of the Istanbul-Calais coach, with a note of the people who occupied the several compartments, and I should also like to see their passports and their tickets.”
“Michel will get you those.”
The Wagon Lit conductor left the compartment.
“What other passengers are there on the train?” asked Poirot.
“In this coach Dr. Constantine and I are the only travellers. In the coach from Bucharest is an old gentleman with a lame leg. He is well known to the conductor. Beyond that are the ordinary carriages, but these do not concern us, since they were locked after dinner had been served last night. Forward of the Istanbul-Calais coach there is only the dining-car.”
“Then it seems,” said Poirot slowly, “as though we must look for our murderer in the Istanbul-Calais coach.” He turned to the doctor. “That is what you were hinting, I think?”
The Greek nodded. “At half an hour after midnight we ran into the snowdrift. No one can have left the train since then.”
M. Bouc said solemnly, “The murderer is with us—on the train now. ...”
第五章 罪行
第五章　罪行             
    他感到很难马上再睡着。首先，他发觉车子没有在开。要是这是个车站。外面可又静得出奇。相比之下，火车上的声音到响得不同寻常。他可以听到雷切特在隔壁房里的响动──象是按下盥洗龙头的卡嗒声，龙头出水声，溅水声，接着又是卡嗒一声，象是关上了龙头。
外面是沿过道来来往往的脚步声。还有，不知是谁穿着卧室的拖鞋，拖着脚走路的声音。
    波洛醒着躺在床上，仰望着天花板。为什么外面的车站这样静呢？他的喉头感到干燥。
他忘记要一瓶常用的矿泉水了。他又看了看表。正好是一点一刻。他打算按铃叫列车员，请他给拿点矿泉水来。他的手掼伸向按钮，可是突然停住了，静寂中，他听到了一阵铃声。列车中没法马上答应每个铃声的。
    丁零……丁零……丁零……
    铃声响了又响。列车员上哪儿去了？有人正有要紧事情哩。
    丁零……
    有这样的人，竟一直这么按着。
    突然，过道里传出来一阵匆忙的脚步声，列车员来了。他在离波洛的包房不远的门上敲着。
    接着，传来了话声──列车员的声音，恭敬，表示歉意。还有一个女人的声音──固执，滔滔不绝。
    哈伯德太太。
    波洛暗自笑起来。
    这场争吵──假定是一场争吵──持续了一些时候。声音的比例是：哈伯德太太的百分之九十对列车员的百分之十。最后，事情好象是解决了。波洛清楚地听到：“晚安，太太。”说着关上了门。
    波洛伸手按铃。
    列车员马上到了。他看上去又热又焦虑。
    “麻烦你，给我拿瓶矿泉水来。”
    “是，先生。”也许是波洛那愉快的目光使得他吐露了心中的话。
    “那位美国老太太──”
    “哦？”
    他擦了擦前额。
    “想不到和她磨了那么多时间！她一定──而是坚持说──她的房间里有个男人！你想象一下，先生。在这样小的一点空间里，”他用手扫了一圈，“他能藏到哪儿去呢？我和她争辩。我给她指出，这是不可能的。可她还是坚持说，她一觉醒来，就看到有个男人在里面。于是我就问，那他是怎么出去了呢？他出去后，门是怎么闩上的呢？可是这些她一概不听。仿佛，我们还烦恼得不够似的。这雪──”
    “雪？”
    “是呀，先生。先生还不知道吗？列车停着呀。我们已经陷在雪堆里了。天知道我们还得在这儿呆多久。我记得，有一次，我们被雪困了七天。”
    “我们现在在哪儿？”
    “在文科夫戚和布罗特之间。”
    “嗨，嗨！”波洛烦恼地说。
    列车员退了出去，回来时，拿来了矿泉水。
    “晚安，先生。”
    波洛喝了一杯水，安心睡去了。
    他刚睡着，什么东西又把他惊醒了。这一次，好象是什么很重的东西，“砰”地一声磕在门上。
    他一跃而起，打开门，朝外一看。什么也没有。可是在他右首不远的过道上，有个女人，里着一件鲜红的和服式睡衣，离他隐去。在另一头，列车员正坐在自己的小椅子上，在记录几大张纸上的帐目。一切都象死一般的静寂。
    “显然，我的神经有点毛病了。”波洛说着，又回到床上。这一次，他一直睡到早上。
    当他醒来时，列车依旧停着。他拉起窗帘，朝外面一看。只见列车四周全是大雪堆。
    他看了看表，已经是九点多了。
    十点差一刻，他又象往常一样，打扮得整整齐齐，漂漂亮亮，朝餐车走去，那正发出一片诉苦声。
    旅客之间原可能存在的一切障碍，现在全都破除。大家都因共同的不幸联结在一起了。
其中数哈伯德太太最为伤心。
    “我的女儿原来说，这是世界上最舒服的一条线路了。我正好可以乘这趟车直达巴黎。
可是现在，我们有可能日复一日地待在这儿。”她哀切地说，“而且，后天我的船就要启航。现在我还指望能赶上它吗？唉，甚至连打个电报退船票都不可能。叫人气得实在不想谈这个了。”
    那个意大利人述说，他在米兰还有急事。大个子美国人说，这“太糟糕了，太太，”并且安慰性地表示了一个希望，到时候列车也许能把时间弥补上。
    “我的姐姐──还有她的孩子们，都在等我，”瑞典太太说着，掉下了眼泪。“我连个信都没给他们。他们会怎么想呢？他们一定以为我出什么事了。”
    “我们得在这儿耽多久呀？”玛丽•德贝汉问道，“没有人知道？”
    这声音听起来很急切，但是波洛发现，她并没有在陶鲁斯快车突然停车时的那种几乎是焦急万分的迹象。
    哈伯德太太又说开了。
    “在这列火车上，连个有经验一点的人都没有。也没有一个人想到要做点什么。只有这么一帮毫无用处的外国人。嘿，要是在家乡，无论如何都会有人出来干点什么的。”
    阿巴思诺特上校转身朝向波洛，用一种谨慎小心的英国法语说道：“先生，我想你是这条线路的董事吧。你可以给我们讲一讲──”
    波洛微笑着纠正他。
    “不，不，”他用英语说，“不是我。你把我的和我的朋友弄错了。”
    “啊！对不起。”
    “没关系，这很自然。我现在住在他以前住过的包房里。”
    鲍克先生没有到餐车里来，波洛朝四周打量一下，看看还有谁不在。
    德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人没有看到，还有那对匈牙利人。雷切特，他的佣人，以及那个德国女佣人都不在。
    瑞典太太擦干了眼泪。
    “我这个人很笑，”她说，“象个孩子似的哭了，不管发生什么事，结果总是会好的。”
    然而，这种基督徒的精神是不能分享的。
    “那倒不错，”麦克昆不耐烦地说。“我们可以在这儿待上几天。”
    “不管怎样，这是在什么国家呀？”哈伯德太太眼泪汪汪地问道。
    当别人告诉她这是南斯拉夫后，她马上说：“哦，一个巴尔干国家，你还能指望什么呢？”
    “你是唯一的能忍耐的一个，小姐。”波洛对德贝汉小姐说。
    她稍微耸了耸自己的肩膀。
    “一个人又能做点什么呢？”
    “你是一个镇静自若的圣人，小姐。”
    “那是指一种超然的态度吧。我觉得我的态度是比较自私的。我已经学会自我节制无益的感情冲动。”
    她甚至看也没朝他看。她的目光越过他，凝视着窗外那一个个的大雪堆。
    “你是一个性格坚强的人，小姐，”波洛有礼貌地说。“我认为，你是我们当中性格最坚强的人了。”
    “哦，不，不，真的。我知道有一个人远比我坚强。”
    “这人是──？”
    她好象突然醒悟过来，刚意识到她正在和一个陌生人，一个外国人谈话，而这人，直到今天早上为止，她只和他交谈过几句。
    她有礼貌地，但是疏远地笑了起来。
    “哦──例如，有那么一位老太太。你大概已经注意到了她。一位十分难看的老太太，可是颇为令人迷惑。她只需举起个小小的指头，用一种文雅的声音要点什么──全车的人都得奔忙。”
    “全车的人也得听从我的朋友鲍克先生，”波洛说，“可那是因为他是这条线路的一名董事，并不是因为他有什么特别的性格。”
    玛丽•德贝汉笑了。
    早晨渐过去了。有几个人，其中包括波洛，还留在餐车里。在这种时刻，聚在一起使人感到时间好过一些。他听了许多有关哈伯德太太的女儿的事，也听了已经去世的哈伯德先生终生的习惯，从他早晨起床，开始吃当早餐的谷类食物，直到晚上最后穿上哈伯德太太亲自为他织的睡袜睡觉的习惯。
    正当波洛听那位瑞典太太为达到传教目的而胡扯的时候，有个列车员走进餐车，在他身旁站住了。
    “对不起，先生。”
    “什么事？”
    “鲍克先生向您问候，他说，要是您能赏光上他那儿去一会的话，他会感到很高兴。”
    波洛站起身来向瑞典太太表示了歉意，就跟着那人走出餐车。
    这不是他自已车厢的列车员，而是个金发白脸的大个子。
    波洛跟在自己的向导后面，经过自己车厢的过道，又沿隔壁一节的过道走着。那人在一扇门上敲了敲。然后站在一边，让波洛进去。
    这个包房不是鲍克先生自己的。这是一个二等包房──它被选中可能是因为它的面积稍微大了一点。可它仍然给人那种拥挤的感觉。
    鲍克先生本人坐在对面角落的那张小椅子上。坐在他对面、靠窗口那个角落里的是一个身材矮小、皮肤黝黑的男人，他正朝外面看着积雪。站在那儿，多少有点妨碍他再向前走的，是一个穿蓝制服的高大男人（列车长）和波洛车厢的列车员。
    “啊，我的好朋友，”鲍克先生叫了起来，“请进来吧。我们正需要你哩。”
    坐在窗口的小个子男人沿坐椅挪动了一下位置，波洛挤过那个另外两个人在他朋友的对面坐了下来。
    鲍克先生脸上的表情，正如他要表现出来的那样，使他有了强烈的想法。显然是发生了什么不平常的事了。
    “出了什么事了？”他问道。
    “这一下你问得好。首先，这雪──这停车。而现在──”
    他停下了──从那列车员身上发出一种压制住的喘息。
    “现在怎么啦？”
    “而现在又有一个旅客死在卧铺上──被刺。”
    鲍克先生带着一种镇静的绝望说。
    “一个旅客？哪个旅客？”
    “一个美国人。一个叫做──叫做──”他查阅了一下面前和笔记本。“雷切特──不错──是雷切特吧？”
    “是的，先生。”列车员哽塞着说。
    波洛朝他一看。他的脸色白得象白垩土。
    “你最好还是让他坐下来吧，”他说，“要不，他也许要晕倒了。”
    列车长稍微挪了挪，列车员一屁股坐在角落里，把自己的脸埋在双手之中。
    “啊！”波洛说“事情很严重！”
    “这当然严重。首先，谋杀──它本身是一桩重大的不幸事件。可是不仅如此。情况不同寻常。我们是待在这儿，处于停车的情况下。我们可能在这儿呆上几小时──也可能不是几小时──而是几天！另一个情况，我们经过的几乎所有的国家，都有该国的警察在车上。
可是在南斯拉夫──没有。你理解了吧？”
    “这是一种十分困难的境况。”
    “还有更糟糕的要说。康斯坦丁大夫──我忘了，我还没有给你介绍──康斯坦丁大夫，波洛先生。”
    身材矮小，皮肤黝黑的男人点了点头，波洛也点头回礼。
    “康斯坦丁大夫认为是在上午一点钟左右死的。”
    “在这个问题上，难以说得很确切，”大夫说道。“可是我认为，我可以明确地说，死亡发生在半夜十二点到凌晨两点之间。”
    “最后看到这位雷切特先生还活着，是在什么时候？”波洛问道。
    “据说在一点差二十分左右，他还活着，当时他和列车员说过话。”鲍克先生说。
    “这很正确，”波洛说，“经过情况我亲自听到。是知道的最后一个情况吗？”
    “是的。”
    波洛转身朝向大夫，大夫继续说：“雷切特先生包房的窗户发现开得很大，使人引起猜想，凶手是从那条路逃走的。但是，我认为，打开窗户是种假象。任何一个从那条路离开的人，都会在雪地里留下明显的足迹。可是没有。”
    “发案──是什么时候？”波洛问道。
    “米歇尔！”
    列车员站了起来。他的脸看上去仍旧苍白、惊恐。
    “把发生的事情如实告诉这位先生。”鲍克先生命令道。
    他有点结结巴巴地说道：“雷切特先生的佣人，今天早上去敲了几次门。都没有答应。
后来，也就是半小时以前，餐车侍者来了。他想要知道先生要不要午餐。这时候是十一点钟。”
    “我用我的钥匙为他开门。可是里面的链条搭上了，而且还上了锁。没有人答应，里面很静，很冷──可是很冷。窗开着，飘进了雪花。我想，也许先生晕过去了。我去叫来了列车长。我们敲开链条进去一看。他已经──啊！真可怕！”
    他又用双手捂住自己的脸。
    “门是锁着的，里面还用链条搭住，”波洛若有所思地说。“那么会不会是自杀──呃？”
    希腊大夫一声冷笑。
    “有朝自己身上捅十刀──十二刀──十五刀自杀的人吗？”他问道。
    波洛的眼睛睁大了。
    “这知说来，凶手很残忍。”他说。
    “是个女人，”列车长说，他第一次开口。“根据这一点，这是个女人。只有女人才会那样戳。”
    康斯坦丁大夫沉思地扭歪了脸。
    “她必须是一个身体十分强壮的女人，”他说，“我不愿从技术上来说──那只会把事情搞乱──可是我可以向你保证，其中有一、两刀是戳得很有力的，戳穿了骨头和肌肉上坚硬的韧带。”
    “显然，这不是一种科学的作案。”波洛说。
    “还有更不科学的哩，”康斯坦丁大夫说，“这么许多刀好象都是胡乱地任意戳的。有几刀只是一擦而过，几乎没什么损伤。象是有人闭上眼睛，然后有狂乱中盲目地戳了又戳似的。”
    “这是个女人，”列车长又说，“女人才象是这样。在她发怒时，力气是很大的。”他的头点的如此一本正经，使得每个人都感到他是有自己切身体会的。
    “我也许有一点情况，可以提出来供你们参考。”波洛说，“雷切特先生昨天曾和我谈过话。他告诉我，就我所能理解他的话来说，他的生命处于危险之中。”
    “‘谋杀’──这就是那个美国人所表明的。是不是？”鲍克先生说，“那么这就不是一个女人了。而是一个‘强盗’，或者是一个‘带枪歹徒’了。”
    列车长很难过，眼见他的理论化成了泡影。
    “要是这样，”波洛说，“那似乎干得太不熟练了。”
    他以行家的口气表示了不同意。
    “车上有一个身体魁梧的美国人，”鲍克先生说，继续发挥着他的想法──“一个外貌粗俗的男人，衣服穿得很糟糕。他成开嚼着口香糖，我相信正经人是不会去嚼那玩意儿的。
你们知道我说的是那一个？”
    受到他注意的列车员点了点头。
    “对，先生，那是十六号。但是不可能是他，要不，我该看到他进出那个包房的。”
    “你也许没看到。也许没看到。不过等一会我们再深入研究吧。问题是：该怎么办？”
说完，他打量着波洛。
    波洛回了他一眼。
    “喂，我的朋友，”鲍克先生说。“你一定理解我即将请求你做的事。我知道你的才干。你来担任这一调查的指挥吧！不，不，你不能拒绝。瞧，对我们来说，这是很严重的──我这是代表国际客车公司说的。在南斯拉夫警察到来的时候，我们要是能提出解决办法，那就简单多了！否则就会拖延时间，增加麻烦，增加数不清的麻烦。大概说都知道，打扰清白无辜的人。相反的──你解开了这个迷！我们就可以说，‘发生一桩谋杀案──这是罪犯！’”
    “假如我解不开这个迷呢？”
    “啊，我亲爱的。”鲍克先生的话突然变得纯粹是爱抚了，“我知道你的声望我也了解你的一些方法。这对你来说，是个理想的案件。查清所有这些人的经历，发现你们的真情──所有的这一切，都得花费时日，进行没完没了的打扰。可是，我不是常听你说，破案只需一个人躺在安乐椅里动动脑子就行了吗？干吧。会见会见列车上的旅客，去看看尸体，检查一下有什么线索，然后──好吧，我相信你！我确信你不会空口讲白话。躺下来想吧──（就象我听你常说的那样）运用你脑子里小小的灰白色的细胞──你会想出来的！”
    他探身向前，深情地看着他的朋友。
    “你的信任感动了我，我的朋友。”波洛激动地说，“正如你所说的，这不可能是一桩困难的案件。昨天晚上，我自己──不过现在我们还是不说这个吧。说真的，这个问题引起了我的兴趣。我一直在考虑，不是在半小时之前，而是困扰了我许多小时了，从我们刚一上车就开始。而现在──这个问题已经到我手上了。”
    “这么说，你是同意了？”鲍克先生热切地说。
    “就这样定了。你把这件事交给我吧。”
    “好，我们大家都听你的吩咐。”
    “首先，我想有个伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢的平面图，上面要注明某个包房是谁占用的。我还想看看他们的护照和车票。”
    “米歇尔会给你这些东西。”
    列车员离开包房出去了。
    “列车上还有些什么旅客？”波洛问道。
    “在这节车厢里，康斯坦丁大夫和我是仅有的旅客。从布加勒斯特来的车厢里，只有一位破脚的老绅士。他是列车员很熟的。在那后面是普通客车，可是那些车厢和我们无关，因为昨天晚上供应过晚餐以后，就都锁上了。伊斯坦布尔──加来国车厢的前面，只有那节餐车。”
    “这么说来，好象，”波洛缓缓地说，“仿佛我们必须在伊斯坦布尔──加来的车厢里找我们的凶手了。”他转向大夫，“我想，这是你所暗示的吧。”
    希腊人点了点头。
    “在晚上十二点半的时候，我们的列车撞入了雪堆。打那以后，任何人都不可能离开列车。”
    鲍克先生严肃地说：“凶手就在我们身边──现在还在车上……”
6 A WOMAN
6 A WOMAN
“First of all,” said Poirot, “I should like a word or two with young Mr. MacQueen. He may be able to give us valuable information.”
“Certainly,” said M. Bouc. He turned to the chef de train. “Get Mr. MacQueen to come here.”
The chef de train left the carriage.
The conductor returned with a bundle of passports and tickets. M. Bouc took them from him.
“Thank you, Michel. It would be best now, I think, if you were to go back to your post. We will take your evidence formally later.”
“Very good, Monsieur,” said Michel, and in his turn left the carriage.
“After we have seen young MacQueen,” said Poirot, “perhaps M. le docteur will come with me to the dead man’s carriage.”
“Certainly.”
“After we have finished there—”
But at this moment the chef de train returned with Hector MacQueen.
M. Bouc rose. “We are a little cramped here,” he said pleasantly. “Take my seat, Mr. MacQueen. M. Poirot will sit opposite you—so.”
He turned to the chef de train. “Clear all the people out of the restaurant car,” he said, “and let it be left free for M. Poirot. You will conduct your interviews there, mon cher?”
“It would be the most convenient, yes,” agreed Poirot.
MacQueen had stood looking from one to the other, not quite following the rapid flow of French.
“Qu’est-ce qu’il y a?” he began laboriously. “Pourquoi—?”
With a vigorous gesture Poirot motioned him to the seat in the corner. He took it and began once more.
“Pourquoi—?” Then checking himself and relapsing into his own tongue: “What’s up on the train? Has anything happened?”
He looked from one man to another.
Poirot nodded. “Exactly. Something has happened. Prepare yourself for a shock. Your employer, M. Ratchett, is dead!”
MacQueen’s mouth pursed itself into a whistle. Except that his eyes grew a shade brighter, he showed no signs of shock or distress.
“So they got him after all,” he said.
“What exactly do you mean by that phrase, Mr. MacQueen?”
MacQueen hesitated.
“You are assuming,” said Poirot, “that M. Ratchett was murdered?”
“Wasn’t he?” This time MacQueen did show surprise. “Why, yes,” he said slowly. “That’s just what I did think. Do you mean he just died in his sleep? Why, the old man was as tough as—as tough—”
He stopped, at a loss for a simile.
“No, no,” said Poirot. “Your assumption was quite right. M. Ratchett was murdered. Stabbed. But I should like to know why you were so sure it was murder, and not just—death.”
MacQueen hesitated. “I must get this clear,” he said. “Who exactly are you? And where do you come in?”
“I represent the Compagnie Internationale des Wagons Lits.” Poirot paused, then added, “I am a detective. My name is Hercule Poirot.”
If he expected an effect he did not get one. MacQueen said merely, “Oh! yes?” and waited for him to go on.
“You know the name perhaps?”
“Why, it does seem kind of familiar. Only I always thought it was a woman’s dressmaker.”
Hercule Poirot looked at him with distaste. “It is incredible!” he said.
“What’s incredible?”
“Nothing. Let us advance with the matter in hand. I want you to tell me, M. MacQueen, all that you know about the dead man. You were not related to him?”
“No. I am—was—his secretary.”
“For how long have you held that post?”
“Just over a year.”
“Please give me all the information you can.”
“Well, I met Mr. Ratchett just over a year ago when I was in Persia—”
Poirot interrupted.
“What were you doing there?’
“I had come over from New York to look into an oil concession. I don’t suppose you want to hear all about that. My friends and I had been let in rather badly over it. Mr. Ratchett was in the same hotel. He had just had a row with his secretary. He offered me the job and I took it. I was at a loose end and glad to find a well-paid job ready made, as it were.”
“And since then?”
“We’ve travelled about. Mr. Ratchett wanted to see the world. He was hampered by knowing no languages. I acted more as a courier than as a secretary. It was a pleasant life.”
“Now tell me as much as you can about your employer.”
The young man shrugged his shoulders. A perplexed expression passed over his face.
“That’s not so easy.”
“What was his full name?”
“Samuel Edward Ratchett.”
“He was an American citizen?”
“Yes.”
“What part of America did he come from?”
“I don’t know.”
“Well, tell me what you do know.”
“The actual truth is, Mr. Poirot, that I know nothing at all! Mr. Ratchett never spoke of himself or of his life in America.”
“Why do you think that was?”
“I don’t know. I imagined that he might be ashamed of his beginnings. Some men are.”
“Does that strike you as a satisfactory solution?”
“Frankly, it doesn’t.”
“Has he any relatives?”
“He never mentioned any.”
Poirot pressed the point.
“You must have formed some theory, Mr. MacQueen.”
“Well, Yes, I did. For one thing, I don’t believe Ratchett was his real name. I think he left America definitely in order to escape someone or something. I think he was successful—until a few weeks ago.”
“And then?”
“He began to get letters—threatening letters.”
“Did you see them?”
“Yes. It was my business to attend to his correspondence. The first letter came a fortnight ago.”
“Were these letters destroyed?”
“No, I think I’ve got a couple still in my files—one I know Ratchett tore up in a rage. Shall I get them for you?”
“If you would be so good.”
MacQueen left the compartment. He returned a few minutes later and laid down two sheets of rather dirty notepaper before Poirot.
The first letter ran as follows:
Thought you’d double-cross us and get away with it, did you? Not on your life. We’re out to GET you, Ratchett, and we WILL get you!
There was no signature.
With no comment beyond raised eyebrows, Poirot picked up the second letter.
We’re going to take you for a ride, Ratchett. Some time soon. We’re going to GET you—see?
Poirot laid the letter down.
“The style is monotonous!” he said. “More so than the handwriting.”
MacQueen stared at him.
“You would not observe,” said Poirot pleasantly. “It requires the eye of one used to such things. This letter was not written by one person, M. MacQueen. Two or more persons wrote it—each writing one letter of a word at a time. Also, the letters are printed. That makes the task of identifying the handwriting much more difficult.” He paused, then said: “Did you know that M. Ratchett had applied for help to me?”
“To you?”
MacQueen’s astonished tone told Poirot quite certainly that the young man had not known of it.
The detective nodded. “Yes. He was alarmed. Tell me, how did he act when he received the first letter?”
MacQueen hesitated.
“It’s difficult to say. He—he—passed it off with a laugh in that quiet way of his. But somehow—” he gave a slight shiver—“I felt that there was a good deal going on underneath the quietness.”
Poirot nodded. Then he asked an unexpected question.
“Mr. MacQueen, will you tell me, quite honestly, exactly how you regarded your employer? Did you like him?”
Hector MacQueen took a moment or two before replying.
“No,” he said at last. “I did not.”
“Why.”
“I can’t exactly say. He was always quite pleasant in his manner.” He paused, then said: “I’ll tell you the truth, Mr. Poirot. I disliked and distrusted him. He was, I am sure, a cruel and dangerous man. I must admit, though, that I have no reasons to advance for my opinion.”
“Thank you, Mr. MacQueen. One further question: when did you last see Mr. Ratchett alive?”
“Last evening about—” he thought for a minute—“ten o’clock, I should say. I went into his compartment to take down some memoranda from him.”
“On what subject?”
“Some tiles and antique pottery that he bought in Persia. What had been delivered was not what he had purchased. There has been a long, vexatious correspondence on the subject.”
“And that was the last time Mr. Ratchett was seen alive?”
“Yes, I suppose so.”
“Do you know when Mr. Ratchett received the last threatening letter?”
“On the morning of the day we left Constantinople.”
“There is one more question I must ask you, Mr. MacQueen. Were you on good terms with your employer?”
The young man’s eyes twinkled suddenly.
“This is where I’m supposed to go all goosefleshy down the back. In the words of a best seller, ‘You’ve nothing on me.’ Ratchett and I were on perfectly good terms.”
“Perhaps, Mr. MacQueen, you will give me your full name and your address in America.”
MacQueen gave his name—Hector Willard MacQueen—and an address in New York.
Poirot leaned back against the cushions.
“That is all for the present, Mr. MacQueen,” he said. “I should be obliged if you would keep the matter of Mr. Ratchett’s death to yourself for a little time.”
“His valet, Masterman, will have to know.”
“He probably knows already,” said Poirot drily. “If so, try to get him to hold his tongue.”
“That oughtn’t to be difficult. He’s a Britisher and, as he calls it, he ‘keeps to himself.’ He has a low opinion of Americans, and no opinion at all of any other nationality.”
“Thank you, Mr. MacQueen.”
The American left the carriage.
“Well?” demanded M. Bouc. “You believe what he says, this young man?”
“He seems honest and straightforward. He did not pretend to any affection for his employer, as he probably would have done had he been involved in any way. It is true, Mr. Ratchett did not tell him that he had tried to enlist my services and failed, but I do not think that that is really a suspicious circumstance. I fancy Mr. Ratchett was a gentleman who kept his own counsel on every possible occasion.”
“So you pronounce one person at least innocent of the crime,” said M. Bouc jovially.
Poirot cast on him a look of reproach.
“Me, I suspect everybody till the last minute,” he said. “All the same, I must admit that I cannot see this sober, long-headed MacQueen losing his head and stabbing his victim twelve or fourteen times. It is not in accord with his psychology—not at all.”
“No,” said M. Bouc thoughtfully. “That is the act of a man driven almost crazy with a frenzied hate—it suggests rather the Latin temperament. Or else it suggests, as our friend the chef de train insisted—a woman.”
第六章 一个女人？
第六章　一个女人？             
    “首先，”波洛说，“我得和年轻的麦克昆谈一谈。他也许能为我们提供有价值的材料。”
    “当然。”鲍克先生说。
    他转向列车长：“去把麦克昆先生请来。”
    列车长离开了包房。
    列车员回来了，带来了一包护照和车票。鲍克先生从他那里接了过来。
    “谢谢你，米歇尔。我想，现在你最好还是回到自己的岗位上去吧。以后我们还将正式向你要证词。”
    “好的，先生。”
    米歇尔转身离开了包房。
    “见过年轻的麦克昆之后，”波洛说，“大夫先生大概可以和我一起到死者的包房去一趟吧。”
    “当然。”
    “我们结束了这儿的工作以后──”
    右是，就在这时候，列车长领着赫克托•麦克昆回来了。
    鲍克先生站了起来。
    “我们这挤了一点，”他愉快地说，“坐我的椅子吧，麦克昆先生。波洛先生坐在你的对面──就这样。”
    他转向列车长。
    “把餐车里的人统统清出去，”他说，“把它静出来给波洛先生用。你在那儿进行会见好吗，我亲爱的？”
    “那该是最适合的了，是的。”波洛表示赞同。
    麦克昆一直站着，看看这个又看看那个，他不大听得懂讲得很快的法语。
    “有什么事吗？”他开始费力地用法语说。“为什么──？”
    波洛做了一个有力的手势，示意要他在角落里的椅子上坐下来。他坐下以后，再一次开始说。
    “为什么──？”接着，他突然停住了，改用自己的语言说，“车上出什么事了？发生了什么事吧？”
    他又看看这个人，看看那个人。
    波洛点了点头。
    “确实如此。出事了。你得为一桩惊人的事做好思想准备。你的主人，雷切特先生死了！”
    麦克昆努起嘴吹一声口哨。此外，他的眼睛逐渐明亮了一点，他点都没有流露出震惊和悲伤的迹象。
    “这么说他们终究把他干掉了。”他说。
    “你这话确切的意思是什么，麦克昆先生？”
    麦克昆犹豫着。
    “你设想，”波洛说，“雷切特先生是被杀的吗？”
    “他能不是吗？”这一次，麦克昆倒表现出惊奇了。“嗯，是的，”他慢慢地说，“我正是这样想的。你的意思是说他睡着的时候死去的吗？嘿，这老头儿壮实得很哪──壮实的很──”
    他突然停住了，为自己的直言不讳感到不知所措。
    “不，不，”波洛说，“你的设想很对。雷切特先生是被谋杀的。用刀戳的。可是我想要知道，为什么你这样肯定，这是谋杀，而恰恰不是──自己死去。”
    麦克昆踌躇着。
    “我必须先弄清楚，”他说，“你到底是什么人？你是哪里来的？”
    “我代表国际客车公司。”波洛停顿了一下，接着又补充说，“我是个侦探。我叫赫卡尔•波洛。”
    如果踊洛是期待这话能起某种效果的话，那他一无所获。麦克昆听了之后只是说：
“哦，是吗？”说完就等波洛再说下去了。
    “你也许知道这个名字。”
    “哦，是么，这的确象是有点知道──不过，我一直以为这是个做女子服装的裁缝哩。”
    波洛厌恶地瞧着他。
    “这不可思议！”他说。
    “什么不可思议？”
    “没什么。让我们继续谈这眼前的事实吧。我要求你告诉我，麦克昆先生，全部你所知道的有关死者的情况。你同他没有亲戚关系吧？”
    “没有。我是──曾经是──他的秘书。”
    “你干这差事多久了？”
    “只有一年多。”
    “请你把全部情况都告诉我。”
    “好的，我只是在一年多以前才遇到雷切特先生的，当时我在波斯──”
    波洛打断了他的话。
    “你在那做什么？”
    “我是从纽约去那儿调查一片油田租借地的。我没有想到你要听这方面的全部情况。当时，我和我的朋友们的处境相当糟糕。雷切特先生也住在同一个旅馆里。他刚刚和他的秘书发生了口角。他提出让我担任这一职务，于是我就接受了。我的自由自在的生活到此结束，然而高兴的是找到了一个现成的、薪金优厚的工作。”
    “打那以后呢？”
    “我们到处旅行。雷切特先生想看看世界。他为不懂久语而感到不便。说我是他的秘书，还不如说是他的旅行随员。这是一种愉快的生活。”
    “现在请你谈谈你的主人的情况，你知道多少就谈多少吧。”
    年轻人耸了耸肩。他的脸上掠过一种不知所措的表情。
    “那可不很容易。”
    “他的全名是什么？”
    “塞缪尔•爱德华•雷切特。”
    “他是美国公民吗？”
    “是的。”
    “他是美国什么地方人？”
    “我不知道。”
    “好吧，把你知道的告诉我吧。”
    “确实的情况是，波洛先生，我什么都不知道！雷切特先生从来不谈自己的情况，也从来不谈他在美国的生活。”
    “你认为这是为什么呢？”
    “我不知道。我想，他也许是为自己的早年生活害羞吧，有些人是那样的。”
    “在你看来，这个解释能使人满意么？”
    “坦白地说，不能。”
    “他有亲属吗？”
    “他从来没有提到过。”
    波洛坚持问下去。
    “你一定作过某种推测吧，麦克昆先生。”
    “噢，是的，我作过。首先，我不相信雷切特是他的真实姓名。我想，他离开了美国，一定是为了逃避某个人或者是某件事情。我认为他是成功的──直到几个星期前。”
    “后来呢？”
    “他开始收到一些信件──恐吓信。”
    “你看过到守这些信吗？”
    “是的。处理他的来往信件是我的职责。第一封信是两星期前收到的。”
    “这些信全毁掉了吗？”
    “没有。我想，我的文件有两封──而另一封，我知道雷切特在盛怒之下撕掉了。需要我去拿来给你吗？”
    “要能那样，那就太好了。”
    麦克昆离开了包房。几分钟后，他回来了，放了两张很脏的信纸在波洛面前。
    第一封信原文如下：“你以为你已骗过我们，侥幸成功了，是吗？决不可能。我们决心要干掉你，雷切特，一定要干掉你！”
    没有署名。
    波洛除了扬了扬眉毛，未加评论，他捡起第二封信。
    “我们打算用车子绑架杀掉你，雷切特。不用多久了。我们将要干掉你！干掉你！当心点！”
    波洛放下信。
    “文体单调！”他说。“笔迹多样。”
    麦克昆盯着他看。
    “你不能看出，”波洛愉快地说，“这要有专门用于这方面的眼光。这封信不是一个人写的，麦克昆先生。是两个人或者更多的人写的──每一次各写一个单词的一个字母。同样，还可以用印刷体写。这就使笔迹的鉴定工作困难得多。”
    他停顿了一下，接着说：“雷切特先生曾请求我帮助，这你知道吗？”
    “请求你？”
    麦克昆惊讶的语气，十分肯定地告诉了波洛，这个年轻人不知道这件事。他点了点头。
    “是的，他害怕了。告诉我，在他收到第一封信时，他表现得怎么样？”
    麦克昆支支吾吾地说：“这很难说。他──他──笑着把信放到一边，还是从容不迫的样子。但是，不知怎么地”──他稍微哆嗦了一下──“我总觉得，在这从容不迫的后面，隐藏着大量的内心活动。”
    波洛点点头。接着，他提出了几个意外的问题。
    “麦克昆先生，你能否老实、确切地告诉我，你认为你的主人怎么样？你喜欢他吗？”
    在回答前，赫克托•麦克昆停了一会。
    “不，”他终于说。“我不能。”
    “为什么？”
    “我没法确切地说。他的举止通常都是很文雅的。”
    他停了下，接着说，“我给你说实施吧，我不喜欢他，也不信任他。我确信，他是一个残忍的人，也是一个危险的人物。然而，我必须承认，我没有足够的理由来进一步阐明我的看法。”
    “谢谢你，麦克昆先生。我要再问一个问题──你是什么时候最后看到雷切特先生活着的？”
    “昨天晚上，大约是在，”──他想了一会儿──“我应该说，大约是在十点钟的时候。我进他的包房去记下几个他口授的回信提要。”
    “有关什么问题的？”
    “有关他在波斯买的彩色瓷砖和陶瓷古玩的。交的货并不是他原来买的。关于这个问题，已经进行了长时间的、恼人的信件交涉了。”
    “那是最后一次看到雷切特先生活着吗？”
    “是的，我看是这样。”
    “你是不是知道，雷切先生是什么时候收到最后一封恐吓信的？”
    “我们离开君士坦丁堡的那开早上。”
    “我还得问你一个问题，麦克昆先生，你同你的主人的关系好不好？”
    年轻人的眼睛突然闪出光芒。
    “这可是个使得我全身毛骨悚然的问题。用一句现在正畅销书上的话来说，就是：‘你抓不到我什么’，雷切特先生和我的关系很好。”
    “麦克昆先生，你大概能把你的全名和你的美国的地址告诉我吧。”
    麦克昆讲了他的全名──赫克托•威拉德•麦克昆，同时给了一个纽约的地址。
    波洛仰身靠在靠垫上。
    “暂时谈到这里吧，麦克昆先生，”他说。“要是你能把雷切特先生的死暂时保密一段时间，我将十分感激。”
    “他的佣人马斯特一定会知道的。”
    “他也许已经知道，”波洛干巴巴地说，“要是那样的话，就设法要他别说出去。”
    “那应该是不困难的。他是个英国人，他是那种宣布‘从不和人交往’的人。他看不起美国人，认为其它的民族也统统不行。”
    “谢谢你，麦克昆先生。”
    美国人离开了这个包房。
    “怎么样？”鲍克先生问道，“你相信这个美国人的话吗？”
    “他似乎还老实，也还坦率。并不因为他完全有可能卷入这一案件而装出对他主人有感情。雷切特先生没有告诉他，他曾谋求我的帮助而没有成功，这是真实可信的，但我并认为这真的是一个可疑的情况。我认为，雷切特先生是这样一种人，他是在任何情况下都不会说出自己意图的。”
    “因此你就宣布至少一个无罪的了。”鲍克先生愉快地说。
    波洛朝他投去责备的目光。
    “嘿，在最后一分钟之前，我怀疑每一个人，”他说，“同样，我必须承认，我看不出这个认真、有远见的麦克昆会失去理智，给受害人十二刀或者十四刀。这和他的心理是不一致的──完全不一致。”
    “不，”鲍克先生若有所思地说，“这是一个怀着狂热的仇恨，被逼得几乎发疯的人的行为──它更多地表明了拉丁人的气质。否则的话，正如我们的朋友列车长所坚持的，那就一定是一个女人了。”
7 THE BODY
7 THE BODY
Followed by Dr. Constantine, Poirot made his way to the next coach and to the compartment occupied by the murdered man. The conductor came and unlocked the door for them with his key.
The two men passed inside. Poirot turned inquiringly to his companion.
“How much has been disarranged in this compartment?”
“Nothing has been touched. I was careful not to move the body in making my examination.”
Poirot nodded. He looked round him.
The first thing that struck the senses was the intense cold. The window was pushed down as far as it would go, and the blind was drawn up.
“Brrr,” observed Poirot.
The other smiled appreciatively.
“I did not like to close it,” he said.
Poirot examined the window carefully.
“You are right,” he announced. “Nobody left the carriage this way. Possibly the open window was intended to suggest that somebody did; but if so, the snow has defeated the murderer’s intention.”
He examined the frame of the window carefully. Taking a small case from his pocket he blew a little powder over the frame.
“No fingerprints at all,” he said. “That means it: has been wiped. Well, if there had been fingerprints they would have told us very little. They would have been those of Mr. Ratchett or his valet or the conductor. Criminals do not make mistakes of that kind nowadays.
“And that being so,” he added cheerfully, “we might as well shut the window. Positively it is the cold storage in here!”
He suited the action to the word and then turned his attention for the first time to the motionless figure lying in the bunk.
Ratchett lay on his back. His pyjama jacket, stained with rusty patches, had been unbuttoned and thrown back.
“I had to see the nature of the wounds, you see,” explained the doctor.
Poirot nodded. He bent over the body. Finally he straightened himself with a slight grimace.
“It is not pretty,” he said. “Someone must have stood there and stabbed him again and again. How many wounds are there exactly?”
“I make it twelve. One or two are so slight as to be practically scratches. On the other hand, at least three would be capable of causing death.”
Something in the doctor’s tone caught Poirot’s attention. He looked at him sharply. The little Greek was standing staring down at the body with a puzzled frown.
“Something strikes you as odd, does it not?” he asked gently. “Speak, my friend. There is something here that puzzles you?”
“You are right,” acknowledged the other.
“What is it?”
“You see these two wounds—here and here—” He pointed. “They are deep. Each cut must have severed blood vessels—and yet the edges do not gape. They have not bled as one would have expected.”
“Which suggests?”
“That the man was already dead—some little time dead—when they were delivered. But that is surely absurd.”
“It would seem so,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Unless our murderer figured to himself that he had not accomplished his job properly and came back to make quite sure—but that is manifestly absurd! Anything else?”
“Well, just one thing.”
“And that?”
“You see this wound here—under the right arm—near the right shoulder. Take this pencil of mine. Could you deliver such a blow?”
Poirot poised his hand.
“Précisément,” he said. “I see. With the right hand it is exceedingly difficult, almost impossible. One would have to strike backhanded, as it were. But if the blow were struck with the left hand—”
“Exactly, M. Poirot. That blow was almost certainly struck with the left hand.”
“So that our murderer is left-handed? No, it is more difficult than that, is it not?”
“As you say, M. Poirot. Some of these other blows are just as obviously right-handed.”
“Two people. We are back at two people again,” murmured the detective. He asked abruptly: “Was the electric light on?”
“It is difficult to say. You see, it is turned off by the conductor every morning about ten o’clock.”
“The switches will tell us,” said Poirot.
He examined the switch of the top light and also the roll-back bed-head light. The former was turned off. The latter was closed.
“Eh bien,” he said thoughtfully. “We have here a hypothesis of the First and the Second Murderer, as the great Shakespeare would put it. The First Murderer stabbed his victim and left the compartment, turning off the light. The Second Murderer came in in the dark, did not see that his or her work had been done, and stabbed at least twice at a dead body. Que pensez-vous de ?a?”
“Magnificent!” said the little doctor with enthusiasm.
The other’s eyes twinkled.
“You think so? I am glad. It sounded to me a little like the nonsense.”
“What other explanation can there be?”
“That is just what I am asking myself. Have we here a coincidence, or what? Are there any other inconsistencies, such as would point to two people being concerned?”
“I think I can say yes. Some of these blows, as I have already said, point to a weakness—a lack of strength or a lack of determination. They are feeble, glancing blows. But this one here—and this one—” Again he pointed. “Great strength was needed for those blows. They have penetrated the muscle.”
“They were, in your opinion, delivered by a man?”
“Most certainly.”
“They could not have been delivered by a woman?”
“A young, vigorous, athletic woman might have struck them, especially if she were in the grip of a strong emotion; but it is in my opinion highly unlikely.”
Poirot was silent a moment or two.
The other asked anxiously, “You understand my point?”
“Perfectly,” said Poirot. “The matter begins to clear itself up wonderfully! The murderer was a man of great strength—he was feeble—it was a woman—it was a right-handed person—it was a left-handed person. Ah! c’est rigolo, tout ?a!” He spoke with sudden anger. “And the victim—what does he do in all this? Does he cry out? Does he struggle? Does he defend himself?”
He slipped his hand under the pillow and drew out the automatic pistol which Ratchett had shown him the day before.
“Fully loaded, you see,” he said.
They looked round them. Ratchett’s day clothing was hanging from the hooks on the wall. On the small table formed by the lid of the wash basin were various objects. False teeth in a glass of water. Another glass, empty. A bottle of mineral water. A large flask. An ash-tray containing the butt of a cigar and some charred fragments of paper; also two burnt matches.
The doctor picked up the empty glass and sniffed it.
“Here is the explanation of the victim’s inertia,” he said quietly.
“Drugged?”
“Yes.”
Poirot nodded. He picked up the two matches and scrutinised them carefully.
“You have a clue then?” demanded the little doctor eagerly.
“Those two matches are of different shapes,” said Poirot. “One is flatter than the other. You see?”
“It is the kind you get on the train,” said the doctor. “In paper covers.”
Poirot was feeling in the pockets of Ratchett’s clothing. Presently he pulled out a box of matches. He compared them carefully with the burnt ones.
“The rounder one is a match struck by Mr. Ratchett,” he said. “Let us see if he had also the flatter kind.”
But a further search showed no other matches.
Poirot’s eyes were darting about the compartment. They were bright and sharp like a bird’s. One felt that nothing could escape their scrutiny.
With a little exclamation he bent and picked-up something from the floor.
It was a small square of cambric, very dainty. In the corner was an embroidered initial—H.
“A woman’s handkerchief,” said the doctor. “Our friend the chef de train was right. There is a woman concerned in this.”
“And most conveniently she leaves her handkerchief behind!” said Poirot. “Exactly as it happens in the books and on the films—and to make things even easier for us, it is marked with an initial.”
“What a stroke of luck for us!” exclaimed the doctor.
“Is it not?” said Poirot.
Something in his tone surprised the doctor, but before he could ask for elucidation Poirot had made another dive onto the floor.
This time he held out on the palm of his hand—a pipe-cleaner.
“It is perhaps the property of Mr. Ratchett?” suggested the doctor.
“There was no pipe in any of his pockets, and no tobacco or tobacco pouch.”
“Then it is a clue.”
“Oh! decidedly. And again dropped most conveniently. A masculine clue, this time, you note! One cannot complain of having no clues in this case. There are clues here in abundance. By the way, what have you done with the weapon?”
“There was no sign of any weapon. The murderer must have taken it away with him.”
“I wonder why,” mused Poirot.
“Ah!” The doctor had been delicately exploring the pyjama pockets of the dead man.
“I overlooked this,” he said. “I unbuttoned the jacket and threw it straight back.”
From the breast pocket he brought out a gold watch. The case was dented savagely, and the hands pointed to a quarter past one.
“You see?” cried Constantine eagerly. “This gives us the hour of the crime. It agrees with my calculations. Between midnight and two in the morning is what I said, and probably about one o’clock, though it is difficult to be exact in these matters. Eh bien, here is confirmation. A quarter past one. That was the hour of the crime.”
“It is possible, yes. It is certainly possible.”
The doctor looked at him curiously. “You will pardon me, M. Poirot, but I do not quite understand you.”
“I do not understand myself,” said Poirot. “I understand nothing at all. And, as you perceive, it worries me.”
He sighed and bent over the little table examining the charred fragment of paper. He murmured to himself, “What I need at this moment is an old-fashioned woman’s hat-box.”
Dr. Constantine was at a loss to know what to make of this singular remark. In any case Poirot gave him no time for questions. Opening the door into the corridor, he called for the conductor.
The man arrived at a run.
“How many women are there in this coach?”
The conductor counted on his fingers.
“One, two, three—six, Monsieur. The old American lady, a Swedish lady, the young English lady, the Countess Andrenyi, and Madame la Princesse Dragomiroff and her maid.”
Poirot considered.
“They all have hat-boxes, yes?”
“Yes, Monsieur.”
“Then bring me—let me see—yes, the Swedish lady’s and that of the lady’s-maid. Those two are the only hope. You will tell them it is a customs regulation—something—anything that occurs to you.”
“That will be all right, Monsieur. Neither lady is in her compartment at the moment.”
“Then be quick.”
The conductor departed. He returned with the two hatboxes. Poirot opened that of the maid, and tossed it aside. Then he opened the Swedish lady’s and uttered an exclamation of satisfaction. Removing the hats carefully, he disclosed round humps of wire-netting.
“Ah, here is what we need! About fifteen years ago hat-boxes were made like this. You skewered through the hat with a hatpin on to this hump of wire-netting.”
As he spoke he was skillfully removing two of the attached humps. Then he repacked the hat-box and told the conductor to return both boxes where they belonged.
When the door was shut once more he turned to his companion.
“See you, my dear doctor, me, I am not one to rely upon the expert procedure. It is the psychology I seek, not the fingerprint or the cigarette ash. But in this case I would welcome a little scientific assistance. This compartment is full of clues, but can I be sure that those clues are really what they seem to be?”
“I do not quite understand you, M. Poirot.”
“Well, to give you an example—we find a woman’s handkerchief. Did a woman drop it? Or did a man, committing the crime, say to himself: ‘I will make this look like a woman’s crime. I will stab my enemy an unnecessary number of times, making some of the blows feeble and ineffective, and I will drop this handkerchief where no one can miss it’? That is one possibility. Then there is another. Did a woman kill him, and did she deliberately drop a pipe-cleaner to make it look like a man’s work? Or are we seriously to suppose that two people, a man and a woman, were separately concerned, and that each was so careless as to drop a clue to his or her identity? It is a little too much of a coincidence, that!”
“But where does the hat-box come in?” asked the doctor, still puzzled.
“Ah! I am coming to that. As I say, these clues—the watch stopped at a quarter past one, the handkerchief, the pipe-cleaner—they may be genuine, or they may be faked. As to that I cannot yet tell. But there is one clue here which—though again I may be wrong—I believe has not been faked. I mean this flat match, M. le docteur. I believe that that match was used by the murderer, not by Mr. Ratchett. It was used to burn an incriminating paper of some kind. Possibly a note. If so, there was something in that note, some mistake, some error, that left a possible clue to the assailant. I am going to try to discover what that something was.”
He went out of the compartment and returned a few moments later with a small spirit stove and a pair of curling-tongs.
“I use them for the moustaches,” he said, referring to the latter.
The doctor watched him with great interest. Poirot flattened out the two humps of wire, and with great care wriggled the charred scrap of paper on to one of them. He clapped the other on top of it and then, holding both pieces together with the tongs, held the whole thing over the flame of the spirit-lamp.
“It is a very makeshift affair, this,” he said over his shoulder. “Let us hope that it will answer our purpose.”
The doctor watched the proceedings attentively. The metal began to glow. Suddenly he saw faint indications of letters. Words formed themselves slowly-words of fire.
It was a very tiny scrap. Only three words and part of another showed.
—member little Daisy Armstrong
“Ah!” Poirot gave a sharp exclamation.
“It tells you something?” asked the doctor.
Poirot’s eyes were shining. He laid down the tongs carefully.
“Yes,” he said. “I know the dead man’s real name. I know why he had to leave America.”
“What was his name?”
“Cassetti.”
“Cassetti?” Constantine knitted his brows. “It brings back to me something. Some years ago. I cannot remember. ... It was a case in America, was it not?”
“Yes,” said Poirot. “A case in America.”
Further than that Poirot was not disposed to be communicative. He looked round him as he went on:
“We will go into all that presently. Let us first make sure that we have seen all there is to be seen here.”
Quickly and deftly he went once more through the pockets of the dead man’s clothes but found nothing there of interest. He tried the communicating door which led through to the next compartment, but it was bolted on the other side.
“There is one thing that I do not understand,” said Dr. Constantine. “If the murderer did not escape through the window, and if this communicating door was bolted on the other side, and if the door into the corridor was not only locked on the inside but chained, how then did the murderer leave the compartment?”
“That is what the audience says when a person bound hand and foot is shut into a cabinet—and disappears.”
“You mean—?”
“I mean,” explained Poirot, “that if the murderer intended us to believe that he had escaped by way of the window, he would naturally make it appear that the other two exits were impossible. Like the ‘disappearing person’ in the cabinet, it is a trick. It is our business to find out how the trick is done.
He locked the communicating door on their side—“in case,” he said, “the excellent Mrs. Hubbard should take it into her head to acquire first-hand details of the crime to write to her daughter.”
He looked round once more.
“There is nothing more to do here, I think. Let us rejoin M. Bouc.”
第七章　尸体
第七章　尸体             
    在康斯坦丁大夫的陪同下，波洛走向隔壁的车厢，前往被害人住的包房。列车员过来用自己的钥匙为他们打开了门。
    两人走到里面。波洛转向自己的同伴，问道：“这包房原来就这样乱么？”
    “什么都没动过。我十分当心，验尸时，尸体都没移动过。”
    波洛点点头。他朝四周打量着。
    他的第一个感觉是冷得厉害。车窗已被推开，而且一直就这么开着，窗帘也被拉去了。
    “嗬嗬”，波洛注意到了，嘴里直哈气。
    另一个欣赏似的笑了：“当时我不想把它关上。”
    波洛仔细地检查了窗口。
    “你说的对，”他宣布说，“没有人从这条路离开过车厢。可能，打开车窗是想要引人作这样的推测，但是，要是那样，这雪已经使凶手的达不到目的了。”
    他仔细地检查了窗框。从口袋里掏出一个小盒子，往窗框上吹上一点份末。“根本没有指纹，”他说，“这是说窗框被擦过了。是啊，即使有指纹的话也只能告诉我们很少的一点情况。那可能地雷切特先生，他的佣人，或者是列车员的。如今的罪犯是不会犯这类错误的了。”
    “既然是这样，”他高兴地接着说，“我们还是把窗关上吧。这儿简直成了冷藏库了！”
    他关上窗，然后第一次把注意力转向躺在铺位上的一动不动的尸体。
    雷切特仰卧着。他那血迹斑斑的睡就，钮扣解开，被扔向背后。
    “我得看看伤口的性质，你瞧。”大夫解释说。
    波洛点点头。他俯身到尸体的上面好一阵子。最后，带着稍感痛苦的表情，伸直了身子。
    “这买卖可不轻松，”他说，“那家伙得站在这儿，一刀又一刀地朝他身上戳。到底有多少处伤口？”
    “我认为是十二处。有一、两处很轻，实际上只是划破一点皮。另一方面，至少有三处可能是致命的。”
    大夫的语气中，有什么引起了波洛的注意。他目光锐利地朝他看看。矮小的希腊人正站在那儿，迷惑解地皱起眉头，朝尸体凝视着。
    “有什么东西使你感到奇怪，是吗？”他有礼貌的问道，“说吧，我的朋友。这儿有什么弄得你大伤脑筋了吧？”
    “你说得对。”另一个承认。
    “是什么呀？”
    “你瞧这两处伤口──这儿，还有这儿，”──他指点着。“它们都很深，每一处都被戳断了血管──然而──口子都没有裂开。应该出血而没有出血。”
    “这意味着什么呢？”
    “这意味着，戳这几刀时，人已经死了──死了一些时候了。可是这无疑是荒谬的。”
    “看来是如此，”波洛若有所思地说，“除非我们的凶手估计自己还没有很好完成任务，再回来彻底的核实一下；可是这显然是荒谬的！还有别的什么吗？”
    “哦，还有一点点。”
    “还有？”
    “你瞧这伤口──在右臂根──靠近右肩。拿我的钢笔试试。你能不能戳这么一刀？”
    波洛举起自己的一只手。
    “对，”他说，“我懂了。这用右手是非常困难的──几乎是不可能的。那就得在相反的方向戳。可是，假如这一刀是用左手戳──”
    “正是这样，波洛先生。这一刀几乎可以肯定是用左手戳的。”
    “这么说，我们的凶手是惯用左手的了？不这还很难说，不是吗？”
    “你说的对，波洛先生。另外一些刀恰恰明显地象是用的右手。”
    “两个人，我们又回到两个人上面来了。”侦探喃喃地说。他突然问道：“电灯原来是开着的吗？”
    “这就很难说了。你知道，每天早上十点钟左右，列车员都要关灯。”
    “开关会告诉我的。”波洛说。
    他检查了顶灯的开关，也检查了活动的订头灯的开关。他把前一盏灯关掉，打开了后一盏灯。
    “好，”他若有所思地说。“现在我们假设这儿有两个凶手：第一个凶手和第二凶手，就象伟大的莎士比亚所写的那样。第一凶手戳了被害者，就关了灯，离开了包房。第二凶手在黑暗中进来，没有看到他或她的任务已经完成，于是就在死者的尸体上至少戳了两次。你对此有什么想法？”
    “动人极了。”矮小的大夫热情地说。
    对方的眼睛中闪烁着喜悦的光芒。
    “你是这样想的吗？我很高兴。可我听起来，这有点像胡说八道。”
    “能在别的解释吗？”
    “这正是我在问我自己的。我们这儿是不是有个巧合或者是什么呢？是不是有什么其它的自相矛盾的地方？例如，会不会受认定两个人作案这种观点的影响？”
    “我认为可以说是的。正如我所说过的那样，这当中有些刀说明是很软弱无力的──缺乏力气，或者是缺乏决心。它们是无力的，一擦而过的几刀。但是，这儿的一刀──还有这儿一刀──”他再次指点说，“这两刀可需要很大的力乞。它们把肌肉都给戳穿了。”
    “这几刀，按你的看法，是男人戳的吧。”
    “非常肯定。”
    “不可能是一个女人戳的吗？”
    “一年轻力壮的女运动员，也许能戳这儿刀，特别是在她处于强烈感情的支配之下时。
但是，在我看来，这是不太可能的。”
    波洛沉默了一、两分钟。
    对方急切地说：“你能理解我的观点么？”
    “完全理解，”波洛说，“事情开始变得一清二楚了！凶手是个力气很大的男人，她是软弱无力的，这是个女人，这是个惯用右手的人，而这是个却是个惯用左手的人──嘿！这完全就是在开玩笑！”
    他突然气冲冲地说：“那么这个被害者──在这整个过程中做点什么呢？他叫喊了吗？
他挣扎了吗？他自卫了吗？”
    他伸手到枕头底下，抽出一支连发手枪，就是雷切特前天给他看过的那支。
    “你瞧，子弹满满的。”他说。
    他们朝四周打量了一番。雷切特白天空的衣服挂在墙上的衣钩上。由盥洗盆盖架成的小桌子上放着各种东西──浸在一杯水里的假牙，另外一只空杯子，一瓶矿泉水，一只很大的长颈瓶，一只烟灰缸，里面有一个雪茄烟的烟蒂和些烧焦的纸片；还有两根燃过的火柴。
    大夫拿起空杯子嗅了嗅。
    “被害者的没有反应，这儿有了解释了。”他从容不迫地说。
    “麻倒的？”
    “是的。”
    波洛点点头。他捡起两根火柴，仔细作了检查。
    “你也找到线索了？”矮个子大夫热切地问道。
    “这两根火柴样子不同，”波洛说，“这一根比那一根扁。你看得出吗？”
    “这是列车上的那种，”大夫说。“纸壳装的。”
    波洛在雷切特的一个个衣袋里摸着。一会儿，掏出了一盒火柴。他拿它们作了仔细比较。
    “比较圆的一根是雷切特先生擦过的。”他说，“让我们看看他是否还有比较扁的这种。”
    但是，经过进一步搜寻，没有寻到别的火柴。
    波洛的眼睛朝包房里四处打量着。他的眼睛闪闪放光，象鸟一般敏锐。使人感到没有什么能够逃过他们的搜查。
    他轻轻地惊叫了一声，俯身从地板上捡起了一样东西。
    这是一小方细棉布，很精致。角落里绣着一个起首字母──Ｈ。
    “一块女人的手帕，”大夫说，“我们的朋友列车长是对的。有个女人与这个案子在牵连。”
    “而且还十分适合地留下了她的手帕！”波洛说，“完全象书上和电影里说的一样──而且对我们来说，事情甚至还要容易，上面还有一个起首字母哩。”
    “我们真走运！”大夫大声叫了起来。
    “是么？”波洛说。
    他的语气中，有点什么使他感到意外。
    可是没等他问明，波洛又一次俯身向地板。
    这一次，他手里拿的是──一根烟斗通条。
    “这大概是雷切特先生的财产吧？”大夫提也说。
    “他的任何一只衣袋里都没有通条，而且也没有烟丝或者烟丝袋。”
    “那么这是一条线索了。”
    “是啊！很明显。而且又丢得很合时宜。不过注意，这是一条男性的线索！不能抱怨这件案子没有线索了。现在已有了充裕的线索了。顺便问一声，那凶器你是怎么处置的？”
    “凶器的影子都没有。凶手一定随身把它带走了。”
    “我想知道为什么。”波洛沉思着。
    “嗨！”大夫正灵巧地在探索死者睡衣的口袋。
    “我把这个给疏忽掉了，”他说，“当时我解天上衣的钮扣，就径直把它扔到后面去了。”
    他从胸袋里掏出一只金表。表壳瘪进，时针正指在一点一刻上。
    “你瞧！”康斯坦丁热切地叫了起来，“这给我们指明了作案时间。同我的推测一致。
我说的是半夜十二点到凌晨两点之间，大概在一点钟左右，虽然在这种问题上，很难说得很确切。好了！有了证据啦。一点一刻。这就是作案时间。”
    “是啊，有可能。完全有可能。”
    大夫迷惑不解地朝他瞧着。
    “请你原谅，波洛先生。我可不太明白你的话。”
    “我不明白自己的话，”波洛说，“我会都不明白，而且，正如你所觉察的，这使我也感到苦恼。”
    他叹了一口气，俯身在小桌子上，仔细检查烧焦的纸片。他自言自语地咕哝着。
    “现在需要一只老式的女人帽盒。”
    康斯坦丁大夫一下子不知道怎么来对待他这句古怪的话才好。然而，波洛没有时间让他发问了。他打开通往过道的门，叫唤列车员。
    那人跑步赶到。
    “这节车厢有多少妇女？”
    列车员扳着手指计算。
    “一、二、三……六个，先生。一位美国老太太，一位瑞典太太，年轻的英国小姐，安德烈伯爵夫人，还有德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人和她的女佣人。”
    波洛考虑了一下。
    “她们都有帽盒吗？”
    “有，先生。”
    “给我去拿来──让我看看──，瑞典太太和那个女佣人的。我只打算要这两只。你可以告诉她们，这是一种海关规则──到底怎么说，由你考虑吧。”
    “不成问题，先生。现在她们都不在自己的包房里。”
    “那就快。”
    列车员走了。他回来时，带来了两个帽盒。波洛打开女佣人的那只，把它扔到一旁。接着，他又打开了瑞典太太的，是时发出一声满意的惊叫。他小心翼翼地拿出帽子，揭开几只隆起的圆形金属网。
    “嗨，这就是我所需要的。大约十五年前，帽盒是做成这样的。可以用一根帽针把帽子串在这种隆起的金属网上。”
    说着，他熟练地取下两只这样的东西。然后重以装好帽盒，吩咐列车员把它们都送还给本人。
    当门再次关上时，他转向自己的同伴。
    “我亲爱的大夫，你瞧我，我并不是一个依赖专门手段的人。这是我所探索的一种心理学，不是指纹或者烟灰。但在这个案子中，我得接受一点科学的帮助。这间房里满是线索，但是我能相信这些线索真的如它们所表明的那样吗？”
    “我不太懂你的意思，波洛先生。”
    “好吧，我给你举个例子──你发现了一块女人的手帕。这是一个女人丢的吗？可是，也许是一个男人作的案，他心里想：‘我要干得让人看起来象是个女人干的。我要给我的敌手不必要地戳上几刀，有几刀要戳得软弱夫力，毫夫作用，我还要把这块手帕扔在人人都能发现的地方。’这是一种可能。还有另一种可能。要是一个女人杀了他，而故意扔下一根烟斗通条，让人看起来象是个男人干的呢？那末，我们是不是应该认真地推测一下，这两个人──一个男人和一个女人──是毫不相关的呢？还是每人都因粗心掉下他们的身份线索的？
是啊，巧合太多了！”
    “可是这帽盒起什么作用呢？”大夫问道，仍旧迷惑不解。
    “啊，这我来讲。正如我所说的，这些线索，这停在一点一刻的表，这手帕，这烟斗通条，它们可能是真的，也可能是假的。这我还没法说。但是，这儿有一个线索，我相信──虽然我可能又错了──不是假的。我指的是这根扁平的火柴，大夫先生。我相信，这根火柴是凶手用的，不是雷切特先生用的。它用来烧毁某种会使罪行暴露的的文件。也许是一本笔记本。要是这样，那本子里一定有什么东西，某种错误，某种罪行，它可能会给对手留下一个线索。现在我要设法使它复原，以便弄清这东西是什么。”
    他走出包房，过一会回来了，带着一只小酒精炉和一把烫发钳。
    “我要用它来烫胡子。”他指指钳子说。
    大夫怀着极大地兴趣注视着他。他把两只隆起的金属网压平，接着小心翼翼地设法把烧焦的纸片放到其中的一只上，又用另一个朝它上面轻轻拍打，然后发钳把两只网罩钳在一起，放到酒精灯的火苗上。
    “这完全是一个临时凑合的代用品，”他扭过头来说，“但愿它能符合要求。”
    大夫聚精会神地注视着这些过和。金属网开始发红。突然，他看到了一些隐隐约约的字迹。慢慢地自己组成几个单词──发光的单词。这是一块极小的纸片。只显出几个字：
    “……小黛西•阿姆斯特朗。”
    “啊！”波洛发出一声尖叫。
    “它告诉你什么吗？”大夫问道。
    波洛的两眼闪闪发光。他小心翼翼地放下钳子。
    “是的，”他说，“我知道死者的真名实姓了。知道他为什么不得不离开美国了。”
    “他叫什么？”
    “凯赛梯。”
    “凯赛梯。”康斯坦丁皱起了眉头。“这使我想起了什么。好些年以前的事吧。我想不起……这是美国的一个案件，是吧？”
    “是的，”波洛说，“美国的一个案件。”
    波洛就无意就此多说了。他朝四周打量着继续说：“等会儿我们再详细谈那个吧。现在让我们先来弄清楚，这儿凡是应该看的，我们是否都已经看了。”
    他迅速、熟练地再一次仔细检查了死者的衣袋，但没有找出什么感举兴趣的东西。他试图打开和隔壁房间相通的那扇门，可是它在另一面被闩上了。
    “有一件事我不明白，”康斯坦丁大夫说，“要是凶手不是越窗逃的，要是这扇通隔壁的门另一面是闩上的，要是通往过道的门不仅里面锁住，而且还搭上了链条，那么凶手是怎么离开这个包房的呢？”
    “这是当一个捆住手脚的人被关进柜子──不见时，观众说的话。”
    “你的意思是──？”
    “我人意思是，”波洛解释说，“要是凶手想要我们相信，他是经由窗口逃跑的，他自然就得使人看起来加外两个出口是不可能的了。象柜子里的‘隐身人’一模一样──这是一种骗局。而揭穿这种骗局，是我们的职责。”
    他把隔壁相通的门在他们这边给锁上。
    “万一，”他说，“那位杰出的哈伯德太太突然心血来潮，想到要收集第一手的罪行材料，写信去告诉她的女儿。”
    他再次朝四周打量了一下。
    “我想，这儿没什么更多的事情要做了。让我们还是重新上鲍克先生那儿去碰头吧。”
8 THE ARMSTRONG KIDNAPPING CASE
8 THE ARMSTRONG KIDNAPPING CASE
They found M. Bouc finishing an omelet.
“I thought it best to have lunch served immediately in the restaurant car,” he said. “Afterwards it will be cleared and M. Poirot can conduct his examination of the passengers there. In the meantime I have ordered them to bring us three some food here.”
“An excellent idea,” said Poirot.
None of the three men was hungry, and the meal was soon eaten; but not till they were sipping their coffee did M. Bouc mention the subject that was occupying all their minds.
“Eh bien?” he asked.
“Eh bien, I have discovered the identity of the victim. I know why it was imperative he should leave America.”
“Who was he?”
“Do you remember reading of the Armstrong baby? This is the man who murdered little Daisy Armstrong. Cassetti.”
“I recall it now. A shocking affair—though I cannot remember the details.”
“Colonel Armstrong was an Englishman—a V.C. He was half American, his mother having been a daughter of W. K. Van der Halt, the Wall Street millionaire. He married the daughter of Linda Arden, the most famous tragic American actress of her day. They lived in America and had one child—a girl whom they idolized. When she was three years old she was kidnapped, and an impossibly high sum demanded as the price of her return. I will not weary you with all the intricacies that followed. I will come to the moment when, after the parents had paid over the enormous sum of two hundred thousand dollars, the child’s dead body was discovered; it had been dead for at least a fortnight. Public indignation rose to fever point. And there was worse to follow. Mrs. Armstrong was expecting another baby. Following the shock of the discovery, she gave birth prematurely to a dead child, and herself died. Her broken-hearted husband shot himself.”
“Mon Dieu, what a tragedy. I remember now,” said M. Bouc. “There was also another death, if I remember rightly?”
“Yes, an unfortunate French or Swiss nursemaid. The police were convinced that she had some knowledge of the crime. They refused to believe her hysterical denials. Finally, in a fit of despair the poor girl threw herself from a window and was killed. It was proved afterwards that she had been absolutely innocent of any complicity in the crime.”
“It is not good to think of,” said M. Bouc.
“About six months later, this man Cassetti was arrested as the head of the gang who had kidnapped the child. They had used the same methods in the past. If the police seemed likely to get on their trail, they killed their prisoner, hid the body, and continued to extract as much money as possible before the crime was discovered.
“Now, I will make clear to you this, my friend. Cassetti was the man! But by means of the enormous wealth he had piled up, and owing to the secret hold he had over various persons, he was acquitted on some technical inaccuracy. Notwithstanding that, he would have been lynched by the populace had he not been clever enough to give them the slip. It is now clear to me what happened. He changed his name and left America. Since then he has been a gentleman of leisure, travelling abroad and living on his rentes.”
“Ah! quel animal!” M. Bouc’s tone was redolent of heartfelt disgust. “I cannot regret that he is dead—not at all!”
“I agree with you.”
“Tout de même, it is not necessary that he should be killed on the Orient Express. There are other places.”
Poirot smiled a little. He realised that M. Bouc was biased in the matter.
“The question we have now to ask ourselves is this,” he said. “Is this murder the work of some rival gang whom Cassetti had double-crossed in the past, or is it an act of private vengeance?”
He explained his discovery of the few words on the charred fragment of paper.
“If I am right in my assumption, then, the letter was burnt by the murderer. Why? Because it mentioned the name ‘Armstrong,’ which is the clue to the mystery.”
“Are there any members of the Armstrong family living?”
“That, unfortunately, I do not know. I think I remember reading of a younger sister of Mrs. Armstrong’s.”
Poirot went on to relate the joint conclusions of himself and Dr. Constantine. M. Bouc brightened at the mention of the broken watch.
“That seems to give us the time of the crime very exactly.”
“Yes,” said Poirot. “It is very convenient.”
There was an indescribable something in his tone that made both the other two look at him curiously.
“You say that you yourself heard Ratchett speak to the conductor at twenty minutes to one?” asked M. Bouc.
Poirot related just what had occurred.
“Well,” said M. Bouc, “that proves at least that Cassetti—or Ratchett, as I shall continue to call him—was certainly alive at twenty minutes to one.”
“Twenty-three minutes to one, to be precise.”
‘Then at twelve thirty-seven, to put it formally, Mr. Ratchett was alive. That is one fact, at least.”
Poirot did not reply. He sat looking thoughtfully in front of him.
There was a tap on the door and the restaurant attendant entered.
“The restaurant car is free now, Monsieur,” he said.
“We will go there,” said M. Bouc, rising.
“I may accompany you?” asked Constantine.
“Certainly, my dear doctor. Unless M. Poirot has any objection?”
“Not at all. Not at all,” said Poirot.
After a little politeness in the matter of precedence—“Après vous, Monsieur”—“Mais non, après vous”—they left the compartment.
第八章　阿姆斯特朗拐骗案
第八章　阿姆斯特朗拐骗案             
    他们发现鲍克先生正吃完一客煎蛋饼。
    “我考虑到最好还是在餐车里马上供应中饭。”他说道，“之后把餐车清出来，波洛先生就可以在那儿询问旅客了。同时，我还吩咐他们给我们三个送点什么吃的到这儿来。”
    “好主意。”波洛说。
    另外两个人还不饿，所以饭很快吃完了，但是一直等到他们呷着咖啡的时候，鲍克先生才提起塞满他们整个脑子的话题。
    “怎么样？”他问道。
    “很好。我已经发现被害者的身份了。我知道他为什么一定要离开美国。”
    “他是谁？”
    “你还记不记得读过有关阿姆斯特朗家的小女孩文章吗？他就是杀害小黛西•阿姆斯特朗的那个人──凯赛梯。”
    “现在我想起来了。一桩震惊世界的事件──虽然细节我想不起来了。”
    “阿姆斯特朗上校是英国人──一位十字勋章的获得者。他是半个美国人，因为他的母亲是华尔街百万富翁韦•克•范德霍德的女儿。他自己娶了琳达•阿登的女儿为妻。琳达•阿登是她那个时代最著名的美国悲剧演员。他们住在美国，有一个孩子──是个女孩──他们宠如掌上明珠。在她三岁那年，她突然被拐骗走了。拐骗者需要一大笔几乎无法办到的钱，作为放回她的赎金。我不想拿这件事已后的全部错综复杂的细节，来让你听得发腻。
我要讲的主要是，在交付了二十万美元这一大笔赎金后，竟然发现了女孩的尸体，她死去已有两个多星期了。公众的义愤达到了爆炸点。接下去还有更糟糕的事。当时，阿姆斯特朗夫人正怀着另一个孩子。在受了一刺激之后，她早产了，生下一个死胎儿，自己也死去。而她的悲伤过度的丈夫也开枪自杀了。”
    “我的天呀！多惨啊。我现有想起来了。”鲍成先生说，“要是我没有记错的话，还死了一个吧？”
    “是的──还有一个法国的或者是瑞士的保姆。警察当局认为她了解某些罪行情况。他们不俱她的歇斯底里的否认。最后，在绝望之余，这个可怜的姑娘跳窗自杀了。事后证实，在这一罪行中，她没有任何同谋关系，完全是无辜的。”
    “这我想起来就不舒服。”鲍克先生说。
    “大约六个月以后，这个凯赛梯，作为拐骗儿童集团的头子被逮捕了。他们过去一直使用这样的手段：一旦警察当局似乎有可能发现他们的踪迹，他们就弄死拐来的孩子，埋掉尸体，然后继续敲诈尽可能多的钱，直到案发。”
    “好吧，我来给你讲清楚这件事，我的朋友。凯赛梯就是此人！可是依靠他积起来的大量钱财，以及通过各种人的秘密疏通，利用法律上的某些不严密，他竟被宣判无罪。尽管如此，他还是有可能被公众私刑处死，公众是决不会善良到让他轻易漏网的。现在，我信为发生的事情很清楚。他改姓换名，并且离开了美国。打那以后，他就成了一位悠闲自在的绅士，在国外旅行，靠他的利息收入生活。”
    “啊！真是一头野兽！”鲍克先生的语气中充满了内心的憎恶，“他死了我并不惋惜──一点也不！”
    “我同意你的意见。”
    “不过，他不应该被杀在东方快车上。有别的地方嘛。”
    波洛笑了笑。他理解鲍克先生在这桩事情上的偏心。
    “我们现在必须讲给自己提出的问题是，”他说，“这桩谋杀案，是凯赛梯过去也卖过的某个敌对集团干的呢，还是私下的复仇行动？”
    人说明了在烧焦的纸片上发现几个字的情况。
    “如果我的假设是对的话，那么信是凶手烧毁的。为什么？因为它提到过‘阿姆斯特朗’这几个字，这是解开这个谜的一条线索。”
    “阿姆斯特朗家还有人活着吗？”
    “这很遗憾，我不知道。我想，我记得当时读到过，阿姆斯特朗夫人还有一个妹妹。”
    波洛继续讲述自己和康斯坦丁大夫共同调查的结果。在提到那只损坏了的表时，残克先生顿时喜形于色。
    “这似乎十分准确地告诉了我们作案时间。”
    “是呀，”波洛说，“这是很方便的。”
    在他的语气中，有一种模模糊糊的东西，弄得另外两个人都迷惑不解地朝他看着。
    “你说你在一点缺二十分时，亲自听到雷切特和列车员说话？”
    波洛刚说了发生的情况。
    “是呀，”鲍克先生说道，“这至少证明，凯赛梯──或者是雷切特，我还是继续这样叫他──在一点缺二十分的时候，一定还活着。”
    “准确地说，是一点缺二十三分。”
    “正式地说，那就是十二点三十七分，雷切特先生是活着的。这至少是一个事实。”
    波洛没有回答。他坐在那儿若有所思地朝前面看着。
    响起敲门声，餐车侍者起了进来。
    “现在餐车已经空了，先生。”他说。
    “我们上那去吧。”鲍克先生说着站了起来。
    “我可以跟你去吗？”康斯坦丁问道。
    “当然可以，我亲爱的大夫。除非波洛先生有意见？”
    “一点没有。一点没有。”
    “你先请，先生，”“不，你先请，”他们互相稍微客气了一下后，就离开了这个房间。
PART II THE EVIDENCE
PART II THE EVIDENCE

1 THE EVIDENCE OF THE WAGON LIT CONDUCTOR

In the restaurant car all was in readiness.
Poirot and M. Bouc sat together on one side of a table. The doctor sat across the aisle.
On the table in front of Poirot was a plan of the Istanbul-Calais coach with the names of the passengers marked in red ink. The passports and tickets were in a pile at one side. There was writing paper, ink, pen, and pencils.
“Excellent,” said Poirot. “We can open our Court of Inquiry without more ado. First, I think, we should take the evidence of the Wagon Lit conductor. You probably know something about the man. What character has he? Is he a man on whose word you would place reliance?”
“I should say so, most assuredly. Pierre Michel has been employed by the company for over fifteen years. He is a Frenchman—lives near Calais. Thoroughly respectable and honest. Not, perhaps, remarkable for brains.”
Poirot nodded comprehendingly. “Good,” he said. “Let us see him.”

Pierre Michel had recovered some of his assurance, but he was still extremely nervous.
“I hope Monsieur will not think that there has been any negligence on my part,” he said anxiously, his eyes going from Poirot to M. Bouc. “It is a terrible thing that has happened. I hope Monsieur does not think that it reflects on me in any way?”
Having soothed the man’s fears, Poirot began his questions. He first elicited Michel’s name and address, his length of service, and the length of time he had been on this particular route. These particulars he already knew, but the routine questions served to put the man at his ease.
“And now,” went on Poirot, “let us come to the events of Last night. M. Ratchett retired to bed—when?”
“Almost immediately after dinner, Monsieur. Actually before we left Belgrade. So he did on the previous night. He had directed me to make up the bed while he was at dinner, and I did so.”
“Did anybody go into his compartment afterwards?”
“His valet, Monsieur, and the young American gentleman, his secretary.”
“Anyone else?”
“No, Monsieur, not that I know of.”
“Good. And that is the last you saw or heard of him?”
“No, Monsieur. You forget he rang his bell about twenty to one—soon after we had stopped.”
“What happened exactly?”
“I knocked at the door, but he called out and said he had made a mistake.”
“In English or in French?”
“In French.”
“What were his words exactly?”
“Ce n’est rien. Je me suis trompé.”
“Quite right,” said Poirot. “That is what I heard. And then you went away?”
“Yes, Monsieur.”
“Did you go back to your seat?”
“No, Monsieur, I went first to answer another bell that had just rung.”
“Now, Michel, I am going to ask you an important question. Where were you at a quarter past one?’
“I, Monsieur? I was at my little seat at the end—facing up the corridor.”
“You are sure?”
“Mais oui—at least—”
“I went into the next coach, the Athens coach, to speak to my colleague there. We spoke about the snow. That was at some time soon after one o’clock. I cannot say exactly.”
“And you returned—when?”
“One of my bells rang, Monsieur—I remember—I told you. It was the American lady. She had rung several times.”
“I recollect,” said Poirot. “And after that?”
“After that, Monsieur? I answered your bell and brought you some mineral water. Then, about half an hour later, I made up the bed in one of the other compartments—that of the young American gentleman, Mr. Ratchett’s secretary.”
“Was Mr. MacQueen alone in his compartment when you went to make up his bed?”
“The English Colonel from No. 15 was with him. They had been sitting talking.”
“What did the Colonel do when he left Mr. MacQueen?”
“He went back to his own compartment.”
“No. 15—that is quite close to your seat, is it not?”
“Yes, Monsieur, it is the second compartment from that end of the corridor.”
“His bed was already made up?”
“Yes, Monsieur. I had made it up while he was at dinner.”
“What time was all this?”
“I could not say exactly, Monsieur. Not later than two o’clock certainly.”
“And after that?”
“After that, Monsieur, I sat in my seat till morning.”
“You did not go again into the Athens coach?”
“No, Monsieur.”
“Perhaps you slept?”
“I do not think so, Monsieur. The train being at a standstill prevented me from dozing off as I usually do.”
“Did you see any of the passengers moving up or down the corridor?”
The man reflected. “One of the ladies went to the toilet at the far end, I think.”
“Which lady?”
“I do not know, Monsieur. It was far down the corridor and she had her back to me. She had on a kimono of scarlet with dragons on it.”
Poirot nodded. “And after that?”
“Nothing, Monsieur, until the morning.”
“You are sure?”
“Ah, pardon—you yourself, Monsieur, opened your door and looked out for a second.”
“Good, my friend,” said Poirot. “I wondered whether you would remember that. By the way, I was awakened by what sounded like something heavy falling against my door. Have you any idea what that could have been?”
The man stared at him. “There was nothing, Monsieur. Nothing, I am positive of it.”
“Then I must have had the cauchemar,” said Poirot philosophically.
“Unless,” put in M. Bouc, “it was something in the compartment next door that you heard.”
Poirot took no notice of the suggestion. Perhaps he did not wish to before the Wagon Lit conductor.
“Let us pass to another point,” he said. “Supposing that last night an assassin joined the train. Is it quite certain that he could not have left it after committing the crime?”
Pierre Michel shook his head.
“Nor that he can be concealed on it somewhere?”
“It has been well searched,” said M. Bouc. “Abandon that idea, my friend.”
“Besides,” said Michel, “no one could get on to the sleeping-car without my seeing them.”
“When was the last stop?”
“Vincovci.”
“What time was that?”
“We should have left there at 11:58, but owing to the weather we were twenty minutes late.”
“Someone might have come along from the ordinary part of the train?”
“No, Monsieur. After the service of dinner, the door between the ordinary carriages and the sleeping-cars is locked.”
“Did you yourself descend from the train at Vincovci?”
“Yes, Monsieur. I got down onto the platform as usual and stood by the step up into the train. The other conductors did the same.”
“What about the forward door—the one near the restaurant car?”
“It is always fastened on the inside.”
“It is not so fastened now.”
The man looked surprised; then his face cleared. “Doubtless one of the passengers opened it to look out on the snow.”
“Probably,” said Poirot.
He tapped thoughtfully on the table for a minute or two.
“Monsieur does not blame me?” said the man timidly.
Poirot smiled on him kindly.
“You have had the evil chance, my friend,” he said. “Ah! one other point while I remember it. You said that another bell rang just as you were knocking at M. Ratchett’s door. In fact I heard it myself Whose was it?”
“It was the bell of Madame la Princesse Dragomiroff. She desired me to summon her maid.”
“And you did so?”
“Yes, Monsieur.”
Poirot studied the plan in front of him thoughtfully. Then he inclined his head.
“That is all,” he said, “for the moment.”
“Thank you, Monsieur.”
The man rose. He looked at M. Bouc.
“Do not distress yourself,” said the latter kindly; “I cannot see that there has been any negligence on your part.”
Gratified, Pierre Michel left the compartment.
第二部 证据
第二部 证据

第一章　列车员的证词       
      
    餐车内准备工作已经就绪。
    波洛和鲍克先生并排坐在桌子的一边，大夫则坐在侧面。
    波洛面前摊着伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢的平面图。上面用红笔标出每位旅客的姓名。

    护照和车票叠在一旁。此外，桌子上还摆着纸张、墨水、钢笔和铅笔。
    “好极啦，”波洛说，“事不宜迟，我们的侦讯法庭这就开庭。我看，我们先得听取列车员的证词。此人的情况你们也许有所了解。他为人如何？他说的话是不是句句可靠？”
    “我敢保证，此人完全可靠。皮埃尔•米歇尔受公司雇用已十四年。他是法国人。家住加来附近。他为人非常正派，老老实实。也许，头脑不那么灵。”
    波洛会意地点了点头。
    “好吧，”他说，“见见他。”
    皮埃尔•米歇尔的自信心虽说有所恢复，但还是十分紧张的样子。
    “希望先生千万不要认为这是我的失职。”他焦急地说，眼光从波洛转到鲍克先生身上。“发生这样的事，太可怕了。希望先生好歹不要把我也牵扯到这桩事中去吧。”
    波洛对他安慰一番，劝他不必担惊受怕。接着便盘问起来。首先，问了问米歇尔的姓名、住址、服务年限以及在这条线路已干了多久。虽说这些事他早已知道，但诸如此类例行公事般的提问到使列车员的心情平静下来。
    “现在，”波洛接着说，“我们来谈谈昨晚的事。雷切特先生是什么时候上床的？”
    “差不多吃了晚饭，他就上床了，先生。事实上车带未离开贝尔格莱德，他就睡了。吃饭时他吩咐我把床好，我照他的话做了。”
    “后来有人去过他的房间没在？”
    “他的佣人去过，先生。还有那位年轻的美国先生，就是他的秘书也去过。”
    “还有谁？”
    “没了，先生。我想，没别的人了。”
    “很好。那么，你这是最后一次见他或听到他说话了？”
    “不，先生。你没忘吧，十二点四十分左右，他还按过铃呢，──就是车停后不久那工夫。”
    “到底出了什么事呢？”
    “我敲了敲门，他只是大声说，是他弄错了。”
    “说的是英语，还是法语？”
    “法语。”
    “怎么个说法？”
    “没什么事。我搞错了。”
    “一点不错。”波洛说，“我听到的也是这么一句。那么，后来你就走了？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “你是回到自己的座位上？”
    “不，先生。那会儿以一处铃响了，我先是上那儿去。”
    “米歇尔，现在问你一个重要的问题──一点一刻你在哪儿？”
    “我吗，先生？我坐在车厢尽头我那小椅子上──面对着过道。”
    “你能肯定吗？”
    “没错。至──少──”
    “当真？”
    “我去过后一节车厢，雅典来的车厢，在那儿我跟一位同事聊过天。我们说到这场雪什么的。那是一点钏过后不久的事，准确的时间说不上。”
    “你什么时候回来的？”
    “我记起来了。听到唤我的铃响，便回来了，先生。我还跟你说过。是一位美国太太，她按了好几次铃了。”
    “我记得，”波洛说，“后来呢？”
    “后来吗，先生？后来听到你的铃声，上你那儿去了。我给你端去一些矿泉水。后来，过了约摸半个小时，给另一位客人铺床──就是那位年轻的美国先生，雷切特先生的秘书。”
    “在你给亿铺床的时候，只麦克昆先生一个人在房里？”
    “十五号的英国上校跟他在一块。他们坐着聊天。”
    “上校离开麦克昆先生以后，干了些什么事呢？”
    “他回自己的房间里去了。”
    “十五号──是不是跟你的座位很近的那一间？”
    “对了，先生。过道尽头倒数第二个包房。”
    “他的床早铺好了？”
    “是的，先生。他吃饭那会儿，我就给他铺好了。”
    “这都是什么时候的事？”
    “准确的时间我可说不上，先生。肯定在两点钟以前。”
    “后来呢？”
    “后来，先生我就一直坐在自己的座位上，直到天亮。”
    “你再也没去过雅典的车厢？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “也许你睡着了？”
    “我想，我不会睡着的。先生，火车一停下来我会从瞌睡中醒过来的。”
    “你有没有见过哪一位旅客在过道走动？”
    他考虑了一下。
    “我想，有这么一位太太上过道尽头的盥洗室去过。”
    “哪一位？”
    “不知道，先生。远远的，下在过道的另一头。况且，又是背对着我。身上空一件鲜红的睡衣，上面还绣着龙呢。”
    波洛点点头。
    “后来呢？”
    “没什么，先生。天亮前什么事也没发生。”
    “你能肯定吗？”
    “哦，先生，请原谅，你自己开过门，往外面张望了一会。”
    “朋友，过就对了。”波洛说，“我只想知道你有没有把这件事给忘了。顺便告诉你，我象是被什么沉重的东西撞在我门上的声音惊醒的。你可知道，那是怎么一回事？”
    他盯着波洛看了一眼。
    “不会有什么事，先生，我敢说，不会有事的。”
    “那委可能是我做恶梦了。”波洛说这话说的有点玄。
    “要不，”鲍克先生说，“那声音是隔壁房里传来的。”
    波洛对他的暗示不加理会，也许，在列车员面前他不想这样做。
    “我们来谈谈另一个问题吧。”他说，“假设昨晚有个杀人犯上了火车，能不能完全肯定，他作了案，但没能逃离火车呢？”
    皮埃尔•米歇尔摇了摇头。
    “那么，他能躲在车上的什么地方呢？”
    “车厢都仔细搜查过了。”鲍克先生说，“别动这种念头吧，我的朋友。”
    “再说，”米歇尔道，“谁要跑到卧车来，别想逃过我的眼睛。”
    “上一站火车停的是什么地方？”
    “文科夫戚。”
    “什么时间？”
    “原定十一点五十八分离站，天气不好，晚点了二十分钟。”
    “会不会有人从普通车厢跑过来呢？”
    “不会的，先生。晚饭一过，普通车厢与卧车之间的门便锁上了。”
    “你在文科夫戚下过车没有？”
    “下过，先生。跟往常一样，下到了月台上，我就站在车厢门口的踏板边，其他列车员都是这个样儿。”
    “前面的那扇门有没有锁上？靠近餐车的那扇？”
    “总是打里面把门闩上的。”
    “这回可没闩上。”
    列车员的脸上露出惊奇的样子，后来又恢复了平静。
    “准是哪位旅客开了门出去看雪景了。”
    “也许如此。”波洛说。
    他若有所思地用手指在桌子上“笃笃”地轻轻敲了一两分钟。
    “先生不怪罪我？”列车员胆怯地问。
    波洛和蔼地朝他笑笑。
    “你算是碰到了晦气鬼了，朋友。”他说，“啊！我又想起了一个问题。你说在你敲雷切特先生的门时，另一处又响起了铃声。确实，我也听到。可是，那是谁按的铃？”
    “是公爵夫人，她要我把她的女佣人唤来。”
    “你去了？”
    “是的，先生。”
    波洛若在所思地看了看面前的图。然后低下头。
    “这会就谈这些吧。”他说。
    “谢谢，先生。”
    他站起身来，看了鲍克先生一眼。
    “别难过了，”鲍克先生好意劝他说，“我看不出你有什么失职的地方。”
    皮埃尔•米歇尔满意地离开了餐车。
2 THE EVIDENCE OF THE SECRETARY
2 THE EVIDENCE OF THE SECRETARY
For a minute or two Poirot remained lost, in thought.
“I think,” he said at last, “that it would be well to have a further word with Mr. MacQueen, in view of what we now know.”
The young American appeared promptly.
“Well,” he said, “how are things going?”
“Not too badly. Since our last conversation, I have learnt something—the identity of Mr. Ratchett.”
Hector MacQueen leaned forward interestedly. “Yes?” he said.
“ ‘Ratchett,’ as you suspected, was merely an alias. The man ‘Ratchett’ was Cassetti, who ran the celebrated kidnapping stunts—including the famous affair of little Daisy Armstrong.”
An expression of utter astonishment appeared on MacQueen’s face. Then it darkened. “The damned skunk!” he exclaimed.
“You had no idea of this, Mr. MacQueen?”
“No, sir,” said the young American decidedly. “If I had, I’d have cut off my right hand before it had a chance to do secretarial work for him!”
“You feel strongly about the matter, Mr. MacQueen?”
“I have a particular reason for doing so. My father was the district attorney who handled the case, Mr. Poirot. I saw Mrs. Armstrong more than once—she was a lovely woman. So gentle and heartbroken.” His face darkened. “If ever a man deserved what he got, Ratchett—or Cassetti—is the man. I’m rejoiced at his end. Such a man wasn’t fit to live!”
“You almost feel as though you would have been willing to do the good deed yourself?”
“I do. I—” He paused, then added rather guiltily, “Seems I’m kind of incriminating myself.”
“I should be more inclined to suspect you, Mr. MacQueen, if you displayed an inordinate sorrow at your employer’s decease.”
“I don’t think I could do that even to save myself from the chair,” said MacQueen grimly. Then he added: “If I’m not being unduly curious, just how did you figure this out? Cassetti’s identity, I mean.”
“By a fragment of a letter found in his compartment.”
“But surely—I mean—that was rather careless of the old man?”
“That depends,” said Poirot, “on the point of view.”
The young man seemed to find this remark rather baffling. He stared at Poirot as though trying to make him out.
“The task before me,” said Poirot, “is to make sure of the movements of every one on the train. No offence need be taken, you understand. It is only a matter of routine.”
“Sure. Get right on with it and let me clear my character if I can.”
“I need hardly ask you the number of your compartment,” said Poirot, smiling, “since I shared it with you for a night. It is the second-class compartment Nos. 6 and 7, and after my departure you had it to yourself.”
“That’s right.”
“Now, Mr. MacQueen, I want you to describe your movements last night from the time of leaving the dining-car.”
“That’s quite easy. I went back to my compartment, read a bit, got out on the platform at Belgrade, decided it was too cold, and got in again. I talked for a while to a young English lady who is in the compartment next to mine. Then I fell into conversation with that Englishman, Colonel Arbuthnot—as a matter of fact I think you passed us as we were talking. Then I went in to Mr. Ratchett and, as I told you, took down some memoranda of letters he wanted written. I said good tight to him and left him. Colonel Arbuthnot was still standing in the corridor. His compartment was already made up for the night, so I suggested that he should come along to mine. I ordered a couple of drinks and we got right down to it. Discussed world politics and the Government of India and our own troubles with Prohibition and the Wall Street crisis. I don’t as a rule cotton to Britishers—they’re a stiff-necked lot—but I liked this one.”
“Do you know what time it was when he left you?”
“Pretty late. Nearly two o’clock, I should say.”
“You noticed that the train had stopped?”
‘Oh, yes. We wondered a bit. Looked out and saw the snow lying very thick, but we didn’t think it was serious.”
“What happened when Colonel Arbuthnot finally said good night?”
“He went along to his compartment and I called to the conductor to make up my bed.”
“Where were you whilst he was making it?”
“Standing just outside the door in the corridor smoking a cigarette.”
“And then?”
“And then I went to bed and slept till morning.”
“During the evening did you leave the train at all?”
“Arbuthnot and I thought we’d get out at—what was the name of the place?—Vincovci—to stretch our legs a bit. But it was bitterly cold—a blizzard on. We soon hopped back again.”
“By which door did you leave the train?”
“By the one nearest to our compartment.”
“The one next to the dining-car?”
“Yes.”
“Do you remember if it was bolted?”
MacQueen considered.
“Why, yes, I seem to remember it was. At least there was a kind of bar that fitted across the handle. Is that what you mean?”
“Yes. On getting back into the train did you replace that bar?”
“Why, no—I don’t think I did. I got in last. No, I don’t seem to remember doing so.” He added suddenly, “Is that an important point?”
“It may be. Now, I presume, Monsieur, that while you and Colonel Arbuthnot were sitting talking the door of your compartment into the corridor was open?”
Hector MacQueen nodded.
“I want you, if you can, to tell me if anyone passed along that corridor after the train left Vincovci up to the time you parted company for the night.”
MacQueen drew his brows together.
“I think the conductor passed along once,” he said, “coming from the direction of the dining-car. And a woman passed the other way, going towards it.”
“Which woman?”
“I couldn’t say. I didn’t really notice. You see I was arguing a point with Arbuthnot. I just seem to remember a glimpse of some scarlet silk affair passing the door. I didn’t look, and anyway I wouldn’t have seen the person’s face. As you know, my carriage faces the dining-car end of the train, so a woman going along the corridor in that direction would have her back to me as soon as she’d passed.”
Poirot nodded. “She was going to the toilet, I presume?”
“I suppose so.”
“And you saw her return?”
“Well, no, now that you mention it, I didn’t notice her returning but I suppose she must have done so.”
“One more question. Do you smoke a pipe, Mr. MacQueen?”
“No, sir, I do not.”
Poirot paused a moment. “I think that is all at present. I should now like to see the valet of Mr. Ratchett. By the way, did both you and he always travel second-class?”
“He did. But I usually went first—if possible in the compartment adjoining Mr. Ratchett’s. Then he had most of his baggage put in my compartment and yet could get at both it and me easily whenever he chose. But on this occasion all the first-class berths were booked except the one that he took.”
“I comprehend. Thank you, Mr. MacQueen.”
第二章　秘书的证词
第二章　秘书的证词
    波洛沉思了片刻。
    “我想，”他终于开了腔。“根据已知的材料，最好还是跟麦克昆先生再深入地谈谈。”
    年轻的美国人很快就来了。
    “哦，”他说，“有什么进展吗？”
    “不太坏。上次跟你谈话以来，我们了解到一些情况──知道雷切特先生是个什么样的人。”
    赫克托•麦克昆很感兴趣地把身子凑过去。
    “是吗？”他说。
    “正象你所怀疑的那样，雷切特不过是化名，他就是凯赛梯，那个大名鼎鼎的专拐儿童的角色──包括轰动一时的小黛西•阿姆斯特朗拐骗案。”
    麦克昆的脸上顿时露出极度惊讶的表情，不久以变得阴沉起来。
    “这个该死地坏蛋！”他大声说道。
    “麦克昆先生，你对此竟一无所知？”
    “是的，先生。”年轻的美国人断然回答，“要是我知道，宁愿砍掉右手，也不会去当他的秘书。”
    “麦克昆先生，你对这事的反应挺强烈，是吗？”
    “这有我个人的原因。我的交亲是地方检察官，经手过这宗案子，波洛先生。我跟阿姆斯特朗太太不止见过一次面──她是个挺漂亮的女人。这么一位有身份的人死得好惨呀。”
他的脸色又阴沉起来，“这原是雷切特，或者说凯赛梯应得的报应。落得这么一个下场才称我的心哩。这种人不配活在世上。”
    “看来，你好象很想自己亲手去干这种好事罗？”
    “我会干的，我──”他停了一会，自知失言，脸刷地红了起来。
    “麦克昆先生，要是你对自己的主人的死表现得过分悲伤，我反而要怀疑起你来了。”
    “我想，我是不会干这种事的，哪怕是为了救自己的命，我也不干。”麦克昆说得很坚决。
    接着他又补充道：
    “要是你不嫌我过于好奇的话，请告诉我，你们是怎样弄清这事的？我是说凯赛梯的身份是如何弄清的？”
    “根据他房间里找到的一斑信的碎片。”
    “但是，可以肯定，我是说那老头儿是相当粗心的，是吗？”
    “各人有各人的看法嘛。”波洛说。
    这年轻人对波洛的回答似乎感到迷惑不解。他盯着波洛看，仿佛竭力想猜出这话的含义。
    “当前我的任务是，”波洛说，“弄清楚车上每个人的活动。用不着生气，无非是例行公事，你理解吗？”
    “那自然。就这样干下去。办得到的话，我会让你弄清我自己的为人的。”
    “似乎没有必要再来问你的包房的号码了，”波洛笑着说，“因为我们还同住过一夜呢。那是二等车，六号铺和七号铺。我走了后，你一个人用着，是不是？”
    “对极了。”
    “麦克昆先生，现在我倒想请你回忆一下昨晚离开餐车后，你做了些什么呢？”
    “那挺简单：我回到房里，看了一会儿书。车到贝尔格莱德，我到月台上去过，因为天太冷，又因到车上来了。跟司壁的一位年轻的英国小姐谈了一会话，后来又跟那个英国人，阿巴思诺特上校聊天。事实上，我们谈话的时候，你正从我们身边经过。后来我到雷切特先生的包房去。这我已经跟你说过，我记了一些他要我写人的信件的提要，跟他道了晚安就离开了。当时阿巴思诺特上校还站在过道上，我的床铺早已收拾好了，所以我便提议，还是跟我去。我要了些饮料，两人便坐下来喝起来了。我们议论世界政治、印度政府、我们财政上的困境，以及华尔街的危机等等。通常，我跟英国人总是话不投机──他们一个个都是些转不过弯的人──可是这位倒讨人喜欢。”
    “你可知道他是什么时候离开你的？”
    “挺迟啦，我想，该有两点了吧。”
    “你们有没有发现列车停了？”
    “是的。开始我们还挺奇怪哩。朝窗外一看，雪积得挺厚，不过没想到会那么严重。”
    “阿巴思诺特上校跟你道了晚安后，还发生过什么事？”
    “他径自回房去了。我把列车员唤来，让他替我铺床。”
    “他铺床时，你在哪儿？”
    “站在外面过道上抽烟。”
    “后来呢？”
    “后来我就上了床，一直睡到天亮。”
    “夜里你离开过火车吗？”
    “阿巴思诺特上校跟我打算下到──那是个什么车站来着？──文科夫戚，下去呆一会儿。可是次序得要命，──暴风雪一个劲地刮着，我们掉转头就回来了。”
    “你们是从那扇门下的车？”
    “离我的包房最近的那扇。”
    “餐车隔壁的那扇？”
    “是的。”
    “可记得当时门是不是闩着的？”
    麦克昆想了一会。
    “可不是，我记得似乎是闩的。至少在根棒什么的横插在拉手上。你是指这个吗？”
    “不错。回来的时候，你有没有把棒给插回去？”
    “倒是没有。我想，没有。我比他后上，想不起来我曾经插过棒。”
    他突然又补充了一句：
    “这事很重要吗？”
    “也许如此，先生。我想作这么一个假设，你与阿巴思诺特上校坐着谈话的时候，你们的包房朝过道的门是开的吧？”
    麦克昆点点头。
    “可以的话，想请你告诉我，从火车离开文科夫戚以后直到你们分手回房睡觉的这段时间里，是不是有人经过过道？”
    麦克昆皱了皱眉头。
    “我想，有一次列车员走过。”他说，“从餐车那边来的。还有一次，有个女人经过过道从另一个方向来的，向餐车那去。”
    “哪个女人？”
    “说不上。事实上，没留意。你是知道的，我跟阿巴思诺特上校辩论得正热烈，偶然看到一个空鲜红丝料衣服的人从门口过去。我没看，反正也不会看清这个人的脸的。你是知道的，我的房间正对着餐车的一头，所以这个女人沿着过道向餐车走去，势必是背朝着我的。”
    波洛点点头。
    “我想，她是去盥洗室吧？”
    “我想，是这样。”
    “她回来时你看见了？”
    “没有。既然你提起这事，我才这么说。虽然我没见过她回来，可是她总得要回来的呀。”
    “还有一个问题，麦克昆先生，你是用烟斗的吧？”
    “不，我不用烟斗。”
    波洛停了一会。
    “我看，暂且就谈这些吧。我想现在就见见雷切特先生的佣人。顺便问一句，你跟他出外旅行时都是坐头等车吗？”
    “他坐二等车，我常坐头等车──这要看雷切特先生隔壁房间里有没有空。他把大部分的行李存放在我的房里，这样，唤我或找东西就方便多了。这次头等车铺位全卖了，只有他一个人预购到一张。”
    “这我知道，谢谢你，麦克昆先生。”
3 THE EVIDENCE OF THE VALET
3 THE EVIDENCE OF THE VALET
The American was succeeded by the pale Englishman with the inexpressive face whom Poirot had already noticed on the day before. He stood waiting very correctly. Poirot motioned to him to sit down.
“You are, I understand, the valet of M. Ratchett.”
“Yes, sir.”
“Your name?”
“Edward Henry Masterman.”
“Your age?”
“Thirty-nine.”
“And your home address?”
“21 Friar Street, Clerkenwell.”
“You have heard that your master has been murdered?”
“Yes, sir. A very shocking occurrence.”
“Will you now tell me, please, at what hour you last saw M. Ratchett?”
The valet considered.
“It must have been about nine o’clock, sir, last night. That or a little after.”
“Tell me in your own words exactly what happened.”
“I went in to Mr. Ratchett as usual, sir, and attended to his wants.”
“What were your duties exactly?”
“To fold or hang up his clothes, sir, put his dental plate in water and see that he had everything he wanted for the night.”
“Was his manner much the same as usual?”
The valet considered a moment.
“Well, sir, I think he was upset.”
“In what way—upset?”
“Over a letter he’d been reading. He asked me if it was I who had put it in his compartment. Of course I told him I hadn’t done any such thing, but he swore at me and found fault with everything I did.”
“Was that unusual?”
“Oh, no, sir. He lost his temper easily—as I say, it just depended what had happened to upset him.”
“Did your master ever take a sleeping draught?”
Dr. Constantine leaned forward a little.
“Always when travelling by train, sir. He said he couldn’t sleep otherwise.”
“Do you know what drug he was in the habit of taking?”
“I couldn’t say, I’m sure, sir. There was no name on the bottle—just ‘The Sleeping Draught to be taken at bedtime.’ ”
“Did he take it last night?”
“Yes, sir. I poured it into a glass and put it on top of the toilet table ready for him.”
“You didn’t actually see him drink it?”
“No, sir.”
“What happened next?”
“I asked if there was anything further, and also asked what time he would like to be called in the morning. He said he didn’t want to be disturbed till he rang.”
“Was that usual?”
“Quite usual, sir. When he was ready to get up he used to ring the bell for the conductor and then send him for me.”
“Was he usually an early or a late riser?”
“It depended, sir, on his mood. Sometimes he’d get up for breakfast, sometimes he wouldn’t get up till just on lunch time.”
“So that you weren’t alarmed when the morning wore on and no summons came?”
“No, sir.”
“Did you know that your master had enemies?”
“Yes, sir.” The man spoke quite unemotionally.
“How did you know?”
“I had heard him discussing some letters, sir, with Mr. MacQueen.”
“Had you an affection for your employer, Masterman?”
Masterman’s face became, if possible, even more inexpressive than it was normally.
“I should hardly like to say that, sir. He was a generous employer.”
“But you didn’t like him?”
“Shall we put it that I don’t care very much for Americans, sir?”
“Have you ever been in America?”
“No, sir.”
“Do you remember reading in the paper of the Armstrong kidnapping case?”
A little colour came into the man’s cheeks.
“Yes, indeed, sir. A little baby girl, wasn’t it? A very shocking affair.”
“Did you know that your employer, Mr. Ratchett, was the principal instigator in that affair?”
“No, indeed, sir.” The valet’s tone held positive warmth and feeling for the first time. “I can hardly believe it, sir.”
“Nevertheless, it is true. Now, to pass to your own movements last night. A matter of routine, you understand. What did you do after leaving your master?”
“I told Mr. MacQueen, sir, that the master wanted him. Then I went to my own compartment and read.”
“Your compartment was—”
“The end second-class one, sir. Next to the dining-car.”
Poirot was looking at his plan.
“I see—and you had which berth?”
“The lower one, sir.”
“That is No. 4?”
“Yes, sir.”
“Is there anyone in with you?”
“Yes, sir. A big Italian fellow.”
“Does he speak English?”
“Well, a kind of English, sir.” The valet’s tone was deprecating. “He’s been in America—Chicago, I understand.”
“Do you and he talk together much?”
“No, sir. I prefer to read.”
Poirot smiled. He could visualize the scene—the large, voluble Italian, and the snub direct administered by the gentleman’s gentleman.
“And what, may I ask, are you reading?” he inquired.
“At present, sir, I am reading Love’s Captive, by Mrs. Arabella Richardson.”
“A good story?”
“I find it highly enjoyable, sir.”
“Well, let us continue. You returned to your compartment and read Love’s Captive till—when?”
“At about ten thirty, sir, this Italian wanted to go to bed. So the conductor came and made the beds up.”
“And then you went to bed and to sleep?”
“I went to bed, sir, but I didn’t sleep.”
“Why didn’t you sleep?”
“I had the toothache, sir.”
“Oh, là-là—that is painful.”
“Most painful, sir.”
“Did you do anything for it?”
“I applied a little oil of cloves, sir, which relieved the pain a little, but I was still not able to get to sleep. I turned the light on above my head and continued to read—to take my mind off, as it were.”
“And did you not go to sleep at all?”
“Yes, sir, I dropped off about four in the morning.”
“And your companion?”
“The Italian fellow? Oh, he just snored.”
“He did not leave the compartment at all during the night?”
“No, sir.”
“Did you?”
“No, sir.”
“Did you hear anything during the night?”
“I don’t think so, sir. Nothing unusual, I mean. The train being at a standstill made it all very quiet.”
Poirot was silent a moment or two. Then he spoke.
“Well, I think there is very little more to be said. You cannot throw any light upon the tragedy?”
“I’m afraid not. I’m sorry, sir.”
“As far as you know, was there any quarrel or bad blood between your master and Mr. MacQueen?”
“Oh! no, sir. Mr. MacQueen was a very pleasant gentleman.”
“Where were you in service before you came to Mr. Ratchett?”
“With Sir Henry Tomlinson, sir, in Grosvenor Square.”
“Why did you leave him?”
“He was going to East Africa, sir, and did not require my services any longer. But I am sure he will speak for me, sir. I was with him some years.”
“And you have been with Mr. Ratchett—how long?”
“Just over nine months, sir.”
“Thank you, Masterman. By the way, are you a pipe-smoker?”
“No, sir. I only smoke cigarettes—gaspers, sir.”
“Thank you, that will do.”
Poirot gave him a nod of dismissal.
The valet hesitated a moment.
“You’ll excuse me, sir, but the elderly American lady is in what I might describe as a state, sir. She’s saying she knows all about the murderer. She’s in a very excitable condition, sir.”
“In that case,” said Poirot, smiling, “we had better see her next.”
“Shall I tell her, sir? She’s been demanding to see someone in authority for a long time. The conductor’s been trying to pacify her.”
“Send her to us, my friend,” said Poirot. “We will listen to her story now.”
第三章　男佣人的证词
第三章　男佣人的证词             
    美国人走后，紧跟着进来的是一个脸色苍白、面无表情的英国人。早在头天，波洛就注意到他了。他毕恭毕敬地站着。波洛示意他坐下。
    “据我所知，你是雷切特先生的佣人吧？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “叫什么名字？”
    “爱德华•亨利•马斯特曼。”
    “几岁了？”
    “三十九。”
    “家庭地址？”
    “克拉肯威尔，弗里大街二十一号。”
    “你的主人被人杀害了，你可听到这消息？”
    “听到了，这实在太意外了。”
    “能不能告诉我们，你是后一次见到雷切特先生是什么时候？”
    佣人想了一会。
    “先生，很可能是昨晚九点以后，兴许还迟些。”
    “你说，当时你在做什么？”
    “跟往常一样，我到雷切特先生那儿，侍候他。”
    “你的确切职责是什么？”
    “把他的衣服折好，或者挂起来，先生。把他的假牙入入水中，再看看睡觉前他还需要些什么？”
    “他的举动是不是跟往常一样？”
    佣人想了一会。
    “可不是吗，先生。我想，他当时心挺烦呢。”
    “怎么个烦法？”
    “他在念一封信。他问是不是我拿到他的房里去。自然罗，我跟他说，我没干过这种事。可他还是把我骂了一通，尽找我的碴儿。”
    “这不反常吗？”
    “不，先生。他是个爱发脾气的人──我说过，要是什么使他烦，他就是那个模样。”
    “你的主人服过安眠药吗？”
    康斯坦丁大夫把身子稍稍往前凑了凑。
    “先生，坐火车外出旅行时，他总爱吃些安眠药。他说，要不就睡不着觉。”
    “你可知道，他习惯服什么样的安眠药？”
    “先生，真的，我可说不上。瓶子里并没有药名，只写上‘安眠药，睡前服’几个字。”
    “昨晚他服过？”
    “喝过，先生。我把药水倒进杯里，放在镜台上，好让他喝。”
    “你亲眼看见他喝的？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “后来呢？”
    “我问他还有什么事没有？问雷切特先生第二天早上我什么时候过去，他说，不按铃就不必来。”
    “过去都是这样吗？”
    “是的，先生。常常这样。他要起床，常常按铃把列车员唤去，再打发他来叫我。”
    “他是爱早起呢，还是起得晚？”
    “先生，这要看他的高兴了。有时候他起来吃早饭，有时候一直睡到吃中饭。”
    “如此说来，整个上午没人叫你，你也就不以为怪了？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “你的主人有仇敌，你可知道？”
    “知道的，先生。”
    他的话毫无感情。
    “你是怎么知道的？”
    “亲耳听见他和麦克昆先生认识论过几封信，先生。”
    “马斯特曼，你喜欢自己的主人吗？”
    马斯特曼听了，脸色变得比平常还要冷漠。
    “说不上喜欢，先生。他人倒还慷慨。”
    “你并不喜欢他，是吗？”
    “倒不如说我对美国人就是没有什么好感。”
    “你去过美国吗？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “你有没有读到过有并阿姆斯特朗拐骗案的报道？”
    他的两颊泛起微微的红晕。
    “说实在的，我还记得，先生。一个小女孩，是吗？一桩叫人震惊的案子。”
    “你可知道，你的主人，雷切特先生就是这起案件的凶犯？”
    “不，先生，我实在不知道。”这个佣人的声调里第一次流露出真正的兴奋和感情。
    “这可是千真万确的事。现在，我们来谈谈你昨晚的活动。你要知道，这不过是例行公事。离开主人后，你干了些什么？”
    “先生，我去跟麦克昆先生说，主人要他去。后来我就回自己的房间里，读书了。”
    “你的包房是──？”
    “二等车最末的那间，先生，挨着餐车。”
    波洛看了看图。
    “这我知道──你睡的是上铺还是下铺？”
    “下铺，先生。”
    “就是说四号铺？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “有人跟你一起住吗？”
    “有的，先生，是个高个子的意大利人。”
    “他说英语？”
    “是的，先生。他会说那么一种英语。”他的话里流露出非难的味儿。“我知道，他在美国──芝加哥──呆过。”
    “你常跟他聊天吗？”
    “不，先生，我宁愿读点书。”
    波洛微微一笑。他可以想象得出那是一种什么场面──一个高个子、爱唠叨的意大利人，碰一个比绅士还要绅士的冷冰冰的先生。
    “请问，你在读什么书？”他问。
    “先生，眼下我在读《爱的俘虏》，作者是阿拉贝拉•理查森夫人。”
    “挺好的一本书？”
    “先生，我挺喜欢。”
    “我们接着谈吧。你回到包房，然后就读《爱的俘虏》一下到──什么时候？”
    “十点半左右，先生。那个意大利人想睡了，列车员便来铺床。”
    “于是你也上床睡了。”
    “我上了床，先生，可并没有睡。”
    “为什么呢？”
    “牙痛，先生。”
    “哦，那可是挺痛的呢。”
    “痛极了，先生。”
    “你可曾想法治治？”
    “我抹了点丁香油，先生，便不那会痛了，不过还是睡不着。索性打开床头灯，又看起书来──不过是分分心而已。”
    “那么你压根儿就没睡着？”
    “是的，先生。大清早四点钟光景我打了一个盹。”
    “你的同伴呢？”
    “那个意大利人？啊，他直打呼噜。”
    “夜里他不曾离开过包房？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “你呢？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “夜里你听见过什么声响没有？”
    “我想，没有，先生。我是说没听见什么异常的。火车停着，四周可静呢。”
    波洛沉默了片刻，接着说：
    “我想，还是有点儿小问题要问。你对这一悲剧一无所知？”
    “我想是这样。先生。这很抱歉。”
    “据你所知，你的主人跟麦克昆先生有没有发生过争执？或者他们之间有没有仇？”
    “哦，先生，不会的。麦克昆先生可个讨人喜欢的先生。”
    “在跟雷切特先生之前，你在什么地方做过事？”
    “跟亨利•汤姆林森爵士，先生，格罗斯维诺广场。”
    “你为什么要离开他？”
    “他要去东非去，先生，再也用着我了。不过，我相信，他会为我证明的，先生。我跟他多年了。”
    “那么，你跟雷切特先生有多久了？”
    “只有十个多月，先生。”
    “谢谢你，马斯特曼。顺便问一句，你右是抽烟斗的？”
    “不，先生，我只抽卷烟──挺蹩脚的，先生。”
    “谢谢你，就这样吧。”
    波洛向他点点头，示意他可以起了。
    佣人迟疑了一会。
    “先生，请原谅，我还有几句话要说。那位美国老太太眼下激动得不得了。她说，谁是凶手她一清二楚。她激动得厉害呢，先生。”
    “如此说来，”波洛笑了笑，“下面我们最好还是找她来。”
    “先生，要不要我去通知她？好一会儿，她一个劲地要求找个负责的。列车员在设法安慰她。”
    “朋友，唤她吧。”波洛说，“听听她要说些什么。”
4 THE EVIDENCE OF THE AMERICAN LADY
4 THE EVIDENCE OF THE AMERICAN LADY
Mrs. Hubbard arrived in the dining-car in such a state of breathless excitement that she was hardly able to articulate her words.
“Now just tell me this—who’s in authority here? I’ve got some very important information, very important indeed, and I’m going to tell it to someone in authority just as soon as I can. If you gentlemen—”
Her wavering glance fluctuated between the three men. Poirot leaned forward.
“Tell it to me, Madame,” he said. “But first, pray be seated.”
Mrs. Hubbard plumped heavily down on to the seat opposite to him.
“What I’ve got to tell you is just this. There was a murder on the train last night, and the murderer was right there in my compartment!”
She paused to give dramatic emphasis to her words.
“You are sure of this, Madame?”
“Of course I’m sure! The idea! I know what I’m talking about. I’ll tell you everything there is to tell. I’d gotten into bed and gone to sleep, and suddenly I woke up—everything was dark—and I knew there was a man in my compartment. I was just so scared I couldn’t scream, if you know what I mean. I just lay there and thought, ‘Mercy, I’m going to be killed!’ I just can’t describe to you how I felt. These nasty trains, I thought, and all the outrages I’d read of. And I thought, ‘Well, anyway, he won’t get my jewellery’—because, you see, I’d put that in a stocking and hidden it under my pillow—which isn’t any too comfortable, by the way; kinda bumpy, if you know what I mean. But that’s neither here nor there. Where was I?”
“You realised, Madame, that there was a man in your compartment.”
“Yes, well, I just lay there with my eyes closed, and wondered what I’d do. And I thought, well, I’m just thankful that my daughter doesn’t know the plight I’m in. And then, somehow, I got my wits about me and I felt about with my hand and I pressed the bell for the conductor. I pressed it and I pressed it, but nothing happened—and I can tell you, I thought my heart was going to stop beating. ‘Mercy,’ I said to myself, ‘maybe they’ve murdered every single soul on the train.’ It was at a standstill anyhow and there was a nasty quiet feel in the air. But I just went on pressing that bell and oh! the relief when I heard footsteps coming running down the corridor and a knock on the door! ‘Come in,’ I screamed, and I switched on the lights at the same time. And would you believe it, there wasn’t a soul there!”
This seemed to Mrs. Hubbard to be a dramatic climax rather than an anticlimax.
“And what happened next, Madame?”
“Why, I told the man what had happened and he didn’t seem to believe me. Seemed to imagine I’d dreamed the whole thing. I made him look under the seat, though he said there wasn’t room for a man to squeeze himself in there. It was plain enough that the man had got away—but there had been a man there, and it just made me mad the way the conductor tried to soothe me down! I’m not one to imagine things, Mr.—I don’t think I know your name?”
“Poirot, Madame; and this is M. Bouc, a director of the company, and Dr. Constantine.”
Mrs. Hubbard murmured, “Pleased to meet you, I’m sure,” to all three of them in an abstracted manner and then plunged once more into her recital.
“Now I’m just not going to pretend I was as bright as I might have been. I got it into my head that it was the man from next door—the poor fellow who’s been killed. I told the conductor to look at the door between the compartments, and sure enough it wasn’t bolted. Well, I soon saw to that. I told him to bolt it then and there, and after he’d gone out I got up and put a suitcase against it to make sure.”
“What time was this, Mrs. Hubbard?”
“Well, I’m sure I can’t tell you. I never looked to see. I was so upset.”
“And what is your theory now?”
“Why, I should say it was just as plain as plain could be. The man in my compartment was the murderer. Who else could he be?”
“And you think he went back into the adjoining compartment?”
“How do I know where he went? I had my eyes tight shut.”
“He might have slipped out through the door into the corridor.”
“Well, I couldn’t say. You see, I had my eyes tight shut.”
Mrs. Hubbard sighed convulsively.
“Mercy, I was scared! If my daughter only knew—”
“You do not think, Madame, that what you heard was the noise of someone moving about next door—in the murdered man’s compartment?”
“No, I do not, Mr.—what is it?—Poirot. The man was right there in the same compartment with me. And what’s more I’ve got proof of it.”
Triumphantly, she hauled a large handbag into view and proceeded to burrow in its interior.
She took out in turn two large clean handkerchiefs, a pair of horn-rimmed glasses, a bottle of aspirin, a packet of Glauber’s Salts, a celluloid tube of bright green peppermints, a bunch of keys, a pair of scissors, a book of American Express cheques, a snapshot of an extraordinarily plain-looking child, some letters, five strings of pseudo-Oriental beads, and a small metal object—a button.
“You see this button? Well, it’s not one of my buttons. It’s not off anything I’ve got. I found it this morning when I got up.”
As she placed it on the table, M. Bouc. leaned forward and gave an exclamation. “But this is a button from the tunic of a Wagon Lit attendant!”
“There way be a natural explanation for that,” said Poirot.
He turned gently to the lady.
“This button, Madame, may have dropped from the conductor’s uniform, either when he searched your cabin or when he was making the bed up last night.”
“I just don’t know what’s the matter with all you people. Seems as though you don’t want to do anything but make objections. Now listen here. I was reading a magazine last night before I went to sleep. Before I turned the light out, I placed that magazine on a little case that was standing on the floor near the window. Have you got that?”
They assured her that they had.
“Very well then. The conductor looked under the seat from near the door, and then he came in and bolted the door between me and the next compartment, but he never went near the window. Well, this morning that button was lying right on top of the magazine. What do you call that, I should like to know?”
“That, Madame, I call evidence,” said Poirot.
The answer seemed to appease the lady.
“It makes me madder than a hornet to be disbelieved,” she explained.
“You have given us most interesting and valuable evidence,” said Poirot soothingly. “Now may I ask you a few questions?”
“Why, certainly.”
“How was it, since you were nervous of this man Ratchett, that you hadn’t already bolted the door between the compartments?”
“I had,” returned Mrs. Hubbard promptly.
“Oh, you had?”
“Well, as a matter of fact I asked that Swedish creature—a pleasant soul—if it was bolted, and she said it was.”
“How was it you couldn’t see for yourself?”
“Because I was in bed and my spongebag was hanging on the door-handle.”
“What time was it when you asked her to do this for you?”
“Now let me think. It must have- been round about half-past ten or a quarter to eleven. She’d come along to see if I had an aspirin. I told her where to find it and she got it out of my grip.”
“You yourself were in bed?”
“Yes.”
Suddenly she laughed. “Poor soul—she was so upset! You see, she’d opened the door of the next compartment by mistake.”
“Mr. Ratchett’s?”
“Yes. You know how difficult it is as you come along the train and all the doors are shut. She opened his by mistake. She was very distressed about it. He’d laughed, it seemed, and I guess he said something not quite nice. Poor thing, she certainly was upset. ‘Oh! I make mistake,’ she said. ‘I ashamed make mistake. Not nice man,’ she said. ‘He say, “You too old.” ’ ”
Dr. Constantine sniggered, and Mrs. Hubbard immediately froze him with a glance.
“He wasn’t a nice kind of man,” she said, “to say a thing like that to a lady. It’s not right to laugh at such things.” Dr. Constantine hastily apologised.
“Did you hear any noise from Mr. Ratchett’s compartment after that?” asked Poirot.
“Well—not exactly.”
“What do you mean by that, Madame?”
“Well—” She paused. “He snored.”
“Ah!—he snored, did he?”
“Terribly. The night before, it kept me awake.”
“You didn’t hear him snore after you had had the scare about a man being in your compartment?”
“Why, Mr. Poirot, how could I? He was dead.”
“Ah, Yes, truly,” said Poirot. He appeared confused.
“Do you remember the affair of the Armstrong kidnap ping, Mrs. Hubbard?” he asked.
“Yes, indeed I do. And how the wretch that did it escaped scot-free! My, I’d have liked to get my hands on him.”
“He has not escaped. He is dead. He died last night.”
“You don’t mean—?’ Mrs. Hubbard half rose from her chair in excitement.
“But yes, I do. Ratchett was the man.”
“Well! Well, to think of that! I must write and tell my daughter. Now, didn’t I tell you last night that that man had an evil face? I was right, you see. My daughter always says: ‘When Mamma’s got a hunch you can bet your bottom dollar it’s O.K.’ ”
“Were you acquainted with any of the Armstrong family, Mrs. Hubbard?”
“No. They moved in a very exclusive circle. But I’ve always heard that Mrs. Armstrong was a perfectly lovely woman and that her husband worshipped her.”
“Well, Mrs. Hubbard, you have helped us very much—very much indeed. Perhaps you will give me your full name?”
“Why, certainly. Caroline Martha Hubbard.”
“Will you write your address down here?”
Mrs. Hubbard did so, without ceasing to speak. “I just can’t get over it. Cassetti—on this train. I had a hunch about that man, didn’t I, Mr. Poirot?”
“Yes, indeed, Madame. By the way, have you a scarlet silk dressing-gown?”
“Mercy, what a funny question! Why, no. I’ve got two dressing-gowns with me—a pink flannel one that’s kind of cosy for on board ship, and one my daughter gave me as a present—a kind of local affair in purple silk. But what in creation do you want to know about my dressing-gowns for?”
“Well, you see, Madame, someone in a scarlet kimono entered either your or Mr. Ratchett’s compartment last night. It is, as you said just now, very difficult when all the doors are shut to know which compartment is which.”
“Well, no one in a scarlet dressing-gown came into my compartment.”
“Then she must have gone into Mr. Ratchett’s.”
Mrs. Hubbard pursed her lips together and said grimly: “That wouldn’t surprise me any.”
Poirot leaned forward. “So you heard a woman’s voice next door?”
“I don’t know how you guessed that, Mr. Poirot. I don’t really. But—well—as a matter of fact, I did.”
“But when I asked you just now if you heard anything next door, you only said you heard Mr. Ratchett snoring.”
“Well, that was true enough. He did snore part of the time. As for the other—” Mrs. Hubbard got rather embarrassed. “It isn’t a very nice thing to speak about.”
“What time was it when you heard a woman’s voice?”
“I can’t tell you. I just woke up for a minute and heard a woman talking, and it was plain enough where she was. So I just thought, ‘Well, that’s the kind of man he is! I’m not surprised’—and then I went to sleep again. And I’m sure I should never have mentioned anything of the kind to three strange gentlemen if you hadn’t dragged it out of me.”
“Was it before the scare about the man in your compartment, or after?”
“Why, that’s like what you said just now! He wouldn’t have had a woman talking to him if he were dead, would he?”
“Pardon. You must think me very stupid, Madame.”
“I guess even you get kinda muddled now and then. I just can’t get over its being that monster Cassetti. What my daughter will say—”
Poirot managed adroitly to help the good lady to replace the contents of her handbag, and he then shepherded her towards the door.
At the last moment, he said:
“You have dropped your handkerchief, Madame.”
Mrs. Hubbard looked at the little scrap of cambric he held out to her.
“That’s not mine, Mr. Poirot. I’ve got mine right here.”
“Pardon. I thought as it had the initial H on it—”
“Well, now, that’s funny, but it’s certainly not mine. Mine are marked C.M.H., and they’re sensible things—not expensive Paris fallals. What good is a handkerchief like that to anybody’s nose?”
None of the three men seemed to have an answer to this question and Mrs. Hubbard sailed out triumphantly.
第四章　美国老太太的证词
第四章　美国老太太的证词             
    哈伯德太太上气不接下气地走进餐车，激动得连话也说不出。
    “快跟我说，这儿谁负责？我有极要紧的话要说，真的，极要紧的话。可是，我只想跟负责的人说。你这位先生要是──”
    她那游移不定的目光轮番在三个人中间转来转去。波洛把身子向前凑了凑。
    “太太，跟我说吧。”他说，“不过，先请坐下来。”
    哈伯德太太在他的对面嘣地一声重重地坐了下来。
    “我要跟你说的就是这么一回事。昨晚车上发生一宗人命案，凶手恰恰就在我的房里呆过。”
    她把说得一字一顿，富有戏剧效果。
    “真的吗？太太？”
    “当然真的，错不了！我才不瞎说哩。我这就把事情一五一十说给你听。我上床就睡着了。忽然，醒了过来──四周黑古隆冬的──我明白过来了，原来房里来了个男人。吓得我不敢吱声。要是你明白那是怎么一回事才好哩。我就这么躺着，心里直嘀咕：‘老天爷，这下我可没命了。’要说有什么感觉，那可说不表。想到的净是些讨人厌的火车和书本上读到过的种种杀人抢劫什么的。心想：‘管它呢，反正他拿不走我的金银珠宝。’知道吗，我早藏在袜子里塞在枕头下了──睡起来自然不很舒服，有点儿高低不平。要是你明白我的意思才好呢。重要的不在这儿。我说到哪儿了？”
    “太太，你说有个男人在你的房里。”
    “正是，我闭着眼，就这么躺着。寻思该怎么办。心想：‘谢天谢地，幸好我的女儿不知道我在受苦受难。’后来，在知怎么一来，我灵机一动，悄悄地摸到了铃儿，手一按，想让列车员来。我一个劲地按铃，按呀按，可是没半点响动。我敢说，我的心眼看着就要不跳了。‘老天爷，’我心想，‘很可能是他把车上的人全宰了。’车停着没开，四周静得叫人发毛。可是我还是一个劲地按铃。后来总算听到脚步声朝过道这头来，有人敲我的门，我这才松了口气。‘进来！’我惊叫起来，同时把灯打亮，睁眼一看，信不信由你，那儿连个人影也没有。”
    说到这里，似乎还不是哈伯德太太这场矣的尾声，倒正是高潮哩。
    “太太，后来呢？”
    “于是，我就把这怪事跟来人说了。他硬是不信，说，很可能是我在做梦。我让他朝铺位底下瞧瞧，他说，床底下窄得很，怎么也躲不得人的。再清楚也不过了那人定是溜走了。
反正房里来过人，就这么一回事。可是最让人受不了的，就数那个列车员，他左劝右说，百般哄我，简直叫人发疯。可我不是人爱瞎想的人，先生。──请问先生大名？”
    “波洛，太太。这位是鲍克先生，公司的董事。这位是康斯坦丁大夫。”
    哈伯熏太太对他们三人咕噜了一句。
    “我相信，遇到诸位很高兴。”她说这几句话，显得心不在焉。然后又专心一意地继续她的独白了：
    “我倒不想把自己装作聪明绝顶，我心里明白，就是隔壁的那个男人──那个给人杀了的可怜的男人。我让列车员瞧瞧两个房间的那扇公用的门。那门明摆着没闩上，我一眼就瞧见了。于是我让他当着我的面当场把门闩上。他走后，我从床上起来，拿来一只手提箱顶着，使得更加稳当。”
    “哈伯德太太，那是什么时候？”
    “可是，就实在的，我可说不上。当时我的心乱成一团麻，压根儿没留神。”
    “那么你现在的意见呢？”
    “我敢说，那是明白不过的事。我房里的那个男人就是杀人凶手，难道还有别人？”
    “你的意思那人又回到隔壁的房间去了？”
    “他到哪里去，我怎么知道？当时我的眼睛紧闭着呢。”
    “他一定是溜出门跑到过道里去了。”
    “那我可说不上。你是知道的，我的眼睛紧闭着呢。”
    哈伯德太太深深地叹了一口气。
    “老天爷，我可是吓坏了！要是我的女儿知道──”
    “太太，你可认为，你听到的就是有人在隔壁房里──被害人的房里，走动的声响吗？”
    “不，我可不这么想，先生。──你的大名？──波洛。波洛先生，千真万确，他就是到我房里来过。再说，我还有证据哩。”
    她得意洋洋地拎来一只手提包，往里掏了起来。
    她先后掏出两块干净的大手帕，一副骨架眼镜，一瓶阿司匹林，一包芒硝，一瓶装在电木管里的绿色发亮的薄荷油，一串钥匙，一把剪刀，一本美国快汇支票，一张极普通的小孩快照，几封信，五串仿造的东方念珠，此外还有一只金属小玩意儿──一颗钮扣。
    “你见过这种钮扣吗？这可不是我的钮扣，也不是我的什么衣服上掉下的。是今天早上我起床时捡到的。”
    她把钮扣放到桌子上。鲍克先生凑过身子，检查了一下。
    “这是列车员制服上的钮扣。”
    “对此可以有一种很合理的解释。”波洛说。
    他把身子很有礼貌地转向美国老太太。
    “太太，这颗钮扣可能是从列车员制服上掉下来的。不是他查看你的包房时掉的，就是昨晚为你铺床时掉的。”
    “我简直弄不明白，你们这些人究竟是怎么一回事，似乎除了跟人作对，再也不干别的。听我说，昨晚临睡前，我有看一本杂志。关灯前我把杂志放在小箱子上，小箱子就在靠窗口的地板上，你们注意到了吗？”
    他们都对她说，注意到了。
    “那就对了。列车员在门边瞧了瞧我的床下，然后起进来闩上与隔壁相通的那扇门，可是他没挨近过那扇窗。今天早上我就在杂志上面发现这颗钮扣。我倒要知道，你们把它叫做什么来着？”
    “太太，我们称之为罪证。”波洛说。
    这位太太对他的回答似乎感到满意。
    “要是你们不相信我，那简直会使人发疯的。”她嚷道。
    “你提供了最有趣，最有价值的证据。”波洛安慰地说，“现在我能不能问几个问题？”
    “请吧，非常欢迎。”
    “既然你那么怕这个雷切特，怎么事先不把那扇两个房间相通的门闩上呢，这是怎么一回事？”
    “我是闩上的。”哈伯德太太当即反驳。
    “唔，是闩上的？”
    “事实上，我问过那个瑞典女人──一个讨人喜欢的女人──门是不是闩上，她说闩上的。”
    “你自己为什么不亲自去看看呢？”
    “因为我已经上了床，我的手提包也挂在门把手上。”
    “你是什么时候问那太太的？”
    “让我想想。大约十时半或者车十五分她来问我有没有阿司匹林，我告诉她放药的地方。她从我的手提包里把药拿去了。”
    “你自己在床上？”
    “是的。”
    她突然笑了起来。
    “多可怜的人──那时她心慌意乱，瞧，她错开了隔壁房间的门呢。”
    “雷切特先生的房门？”
    “是啊，你是知道的，道道门都是关着，在火车上走是多不容易的事。她错开了他的门。她对这事很懊恼。他倒笑了。看来，我可以想象得出，他说了些很难听的话。可怜的人儿，她慌极了。‘啊，搞错了，’她说，‘挺难为情的，他不是个好人。’她说他说她：
‘你太老了。’”
    康斯坦丁大夫吃吃地笑了起来。哈伯德太太立刻盯了他一眼。
    “他不是个好东西，”好说，“对一位太太说出这样的话来。这种事是不该取笑的。”
    康斯坦丁大夫急忙道歉。
    “这以后，你可听见雷切特先生房里有什么声响？”波洛问。
    “嗯──很难说。”
    “太太，这话是什么意思？”
    “是这样──”她停了一下。“他在打鼾。”
    “哦，他在打鼾，是吗？”
    “响极了。前天晚上闹得我一刻也不安宁。”
    “自那个男人在你房里吓了你以后，再也没听见他打过鼾？”
    “波洛先生，那怎么可能呢？他不是死了吗？”
    “唔，唔，这倒是真的。”波洛说。他显得有点糊涂的样子。
    “哈伯德太太，你可记得阿姆斯特朗拐骗案？”他问道。
    “记得，当然记得。这个坏蛋居然还给他漏了网！啊，我真想亲手宰了他！”
    “他可逃不了啦，他死了。昨天晚上死的。”
    “你的意思是──？”哈伯德太太激动得从椅子上欠起身子。
    “然而，是的。我就是这个意思。雷切特就是这个人。”
    “好啊，想想看，这该多好。我非写信告诉我的女儿不可。昨天晚上我不是跟你说过，这人有一副可恶的面孔？瞧，我说对了。我的女儿老是说，只要妈妈一猜，你尽管押上所有的钱，准保会赢。”
    “你跟阿姆思斯特朗一家认识吗，哈伯德太太？”
    “不认识。他们家进进出出的尽是有身份的人家。不过我听过，阿姆思斯特朗太太是个讨人喜欢的女人，她的丈夫很敬重她。”
    “哈伯德太太，你帮了我们的大忙──说真的很大的忙。也许，你乐意把自己的全名告诉我吧？”
    “自然可以。卡罗琳•玛莎•哈伯德。”
    “能不能写下你的地址？”
    哈伯德太太一面说，一面写。
    “我简直不敢相信，凯赛梯就在这节车厢上。波洛先生。我对这个人可是有所预感的，是吗？”
    “是的，太太，果真如此。顺便问一句，你右有鲜红色的丝睡衣？”
    “老天爷，问得多奇怪！怎么会有呢！我身边有两件睡衣──一件是粉红色的法兰绒的，坐般时穿起来挺舒服。还有一件是我女儿送给我的礼物──紫色的，丝的，在家里时穿。可是你问我的睡衣为的是什么？”
    “是这么一回事，太太。有一个穿鲜红睡衣的，昨天晚上到过你的包房或雷切特先生的包房。正如你刚才所说的那样，那时所有房门都关着，这样就很难弄明白究竟是哪个包房。”
    “可是没什么穿红睡衣的人到过我的包房。”
    “那必然是到雷切特先生的包房去了。”
    哈伯德太太撅起嘴，恶狠狠地说：“那我可不感到意外。”
    波洛把身子凑过去。
    “这么说来，你听到了隔壁房里有女人的声音？”
    “波洛先生，我真弄不明白，你怎么会有这样的猜想。我真不明白。不过──嗯──事实上，我是听见的。”
    “可是刚才我问你可听到隔壁有什么声响，你说只听到雷切特先生的打鼾声。”
    “一点也不假。有段时间他在打鼾，另外的时间嘛──”说着，哈伯德太太的脸飞红起来。“这事可是叫人难出口。”
    “你是什么时候听到女人的声音？”
    “我说不上。我只醒过来一会儿，便听到一个女人在说话。她在那儿，这是明摆着的事。我心里直嘀咕：‘他原来是这么一种人，我才不奇怪哩。’接着我又睡着了。我相信要是你不刨根寻底的话，我是不会把这种事告诉你们三位陌生的先生的。”
    “这是在那个男人吓了你之前还是在之后发生的？”
    “你可说对了！要是他死了，他就不会跟女人说话了，是不是？”
    “请原谅，太太，你认为我是个傻瓜吧。”
    “我推想，即使象你这样的人，有时不免也有糊涂的时候。我就是没想到这个恶棍就是凯赛梯。我的女儿会怎么说──”
    波洛利落地帮助这位好心肠的太太收拾好手提包里的东西。最后说：
    “你的手帕掉了，太太。”
    哈伯德太太看了一眼他递过来的一方小小的细棉布手帕。
    “这不是我的，波洛先生。我自己的在这儿哪。”
    “请原谅。看到上面有个‘Ｈ’便当作是你的了。”
    “这事全稀奇古怪。可是果真不是我的。我的手帕上绣着Ｃ•Ｍ•Ｈ三个字母，而且都是些很合用的普普通通的大路货──不是高档的巴黎来的稀罕玩意儿。这么精细的手帕谁配得上使？”
    三个人谁也没有回答她的问题。哈伯德太太好不得意，飘然去了。
5 THE EVIDENCE OF THE SWEDISH LADY
5 THE EVIDENCE OF THE SWEDISH LADY
M. Bouc was handling the button that Mrs. Hubbard had left behind her.
“This button. I cannot understand it. Does it mean that after all, Pierre Michel is involved in some way?” he asked. He paused, then continued, as Poirot did not reply. “What have you to say, my friend?”
“That button, it suggests possibilities,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Let us interview next the Swedish lady before we discuss the evidence that we have heard.”
He sorted through the pile of passports in front of him. “Ah! here we are. Greta Ohlsson, age forty-nine.”
M. Bouc gave directions to the restaurant attendant, and presently the lady with the yellowish grey bun of hair and the long, mild, sheep-like face was ushered in. She peered short-sightedly at Poirot through her glasses, but was quite calm.
It transpired that she understood and spoke French, so the conversation took place in that language. Poirot first asked her the questions to which he already knew the answers—her name, age, and address. He then asked her her occupation.
She was, she told him, matron in a missionary school near Stamboul. She was a trained nurse.
“You know, of course, of what took place last night, Mademoiselle?”
“Naturally. It is very dreadful. And the American lady tells me that the murderer was actually in her compartment.”
“I hear, Mademoiselle, that you were the last person to see the murdered man alive?”
“I do not know. It may be so. I opened the door of his compartment by mistake. I was much ashamed. It was a most awkward mistake.”
“You actually saw him?”
“Yes. He was reading a book. I apologised quickly and withdrew.”
“Did he say anything to you?”
A slight flush showed on the worthy lady’s cheek.
“He laughed and said a few words. I—I did not quite catch them.”
“And what did you do after that, Mademoiselle?” asked Poirot, passing from the subject tactfully.
“I went in to the American lady, Mrs. Hubbard. I asked her for some aspirin and she gave it to me.”
“Did she ask you whether the communicating door between her compartment and that of Mr. Ratchett was bolted?”
“Yes.”
“And was it?”
“Yes.”
“And after that?”
“After that I went back to my compartment, took the aspirin, and lay down.”
“What time was all this?”
“When I got into bed it was five minutes to eleven. I know because I looked at my watch before I wound it up.”
“Did you go to sleep quickly?”
“Not very quickly. My head got better, but I lay awake some time.”
“Had the train come to a stop before you went to sleep?”
“I do not think so. We stopped, I think, at a station just as I was getting drowsy.”
“That would be Vincovci. Now your compartment, Mademoiselle, is this one?” He indicated it on the plan.
“That is so, yes.”
“You had the upper or the lower berth?”
“The lower berth, No. 10.”
“And you had a companion?’
“Yes, a young English lady. Very nice, very amiable. She had travelled from Baghdad.”
“After the train left Vincovci, did she leave the compartment?”
“No, I am sure she did not.”
“Why are you sure if you were asleep?”
“I sleep very lightly. I am used to waking at a sound. I am sure that if she had come down from the berth above I should have awakened.”
“Did you yourself leave the compartment?”
“Not until this morning.”
“Have you a scarlet silk kimono, Mademoiselle?”
“No, indeed. I have a good comfortable dressing-gown of Jaeger material.”
“And the lady with you, Miss Debenham? What colour is her dressing-gown?’
“A pale mauve aba such as you buy in the East.”
Poirot nodded. Then he asked in a friendly tone: “Why are you taking this journey? A holiday?”
“Yes, I am going home for a holiday. But first I am going to Lausanne to stay with a sister for a week or so.”
“Perhaps you will be so amiable as to write me down the name and address of your sister?’
“With pleasure.”
She took the paper and pencil he gave her and wrote down the name and address as requested.
“Have you ever been in America, Mademoiselle?”
“No. I very nearly went once. I was to go with an invalid lady, but the plan was cancelled at the last moment. I much regretted this. They are very good, the Americans. They give much money to found schools and hospitals. And they are very practical.”
“Do you remember hearing of the Armstrong kidnapping case?”
“No, what was that?”
Poirot explained.
Greta Ohlsson was indignant. Her yellow bun of hair quivered with her emotion.
“That there are in the world such evil men! It tries one’s faith. The poor mother—my heart aches for her.”
The amiable Swede departed, her kindly face flushed, her eyes suffused with tears.
Poirot was writing busily on a sheet of paper.
“What is it you write there, my friend?” asked M. Bouc.
“Mon cher, it is my habit to be neat and orderly. I make here a little chronological table of events.”
He finished writing and passed the paper to M. Bouc.
9.15 Train leaves Belgrade.
about 9.40 Valet leaves Ratchett with sleeping draught beside him.
about 10.00 MacQueen leaves Ratchett.
about 10.40 Greta Ohlsson sees Ratchett (last seen alive). N.B. He was awake reading a book.
0.10 Train leaves Vincovci (late).
0.30 Train runs into a snowdrift.
0.37 Ratchett’s bell rings. Conductor answers it. Ratchett says: “Ce n’est rien. Je me suis trompé.”
about 1.17 Mrs. Hubbard thinks man is in her carriage. Rings for conductor.
M. Bouc nodded approval.
“That is very clear,” he said.
“There is nothing there that strikes you as at all odd?”
“No, it seems all quite clear and aboveboard. It seems quite plain that the crime was committed at 1.15. The evidence of the watch shows us that, and Mrs. Hubbard’s story fits in. For my mind, I will make a guess at the identity of the murderer. I say, my friend, that it is the big Italian. He comes from America—from Chicago—and remember an Italian’s weapon is the knife, and he stabs not once but several times.”
“That is true.”
“Without a doubt, that is the solution of the mystery. Doubtless he and this Ratchett were in this kidnapping business together. Cassetti is an Italian name. In some way Ratchett did on him what they call the double-cross. The Italian tracks him down, sends him warning letters first, and finally revenges himself upon him in a brutal way. It is all quite simple.”
Poirot shook his head doubtfully.
“It is hardly so simple as that, I fear,” he murmured.
“Me, I am convinced it is the truth,” said M. Bouc, becoming more and more enamoured of his theory.
“And what about the valet with the toothache who swears that the Italian never left the compartment?”
“That is the difficulty.”
Poirot twinkled.
“Yes, it is annoying, that. Unlucky for your theory, and extremely lucky for our Italian friend that M. Ratchett’s valet should have had the toothache.”
“It will be explained,” said M. Bouc with magnificent certainty.
Poirot shook his head again.
“No, it is hardly so simple as that,” he murmured again.
第五章　瑞典太太的证词
第五章　瑞典太太的证词             
    鲍克先生手里拿着哈伯德太太留下的钮扣。
    “这么一只钮扣，实在叫人摸不透。是不是说，皮埃尔•米歇尔也卷进这一案子？”他说。他停了一会，看看波洛没有回答，便接着说：“朋友，你的意见呢？”
    “这颗钮扣说明：存在几种可能。”波洛沉思道。“在讨论现有的证据之前，我们先找瑞典太太谈谈。”
    他把面前的一叠护照清理一番。
    “啊，在这儿哪！格莱达•奥尔逊，四十九岁。”
    鲍克先生派餐车侍者去。不久，一位淡黄卷发，温柔的、生着一张长长的羊一般脸孔的女人被领了进来。她透过近视眼镜匆匆地看了波洛一眼。她的神情相当安详。
    显然，她法语能听也能说。可以用法语进行这次交谈了。波洛向她提了几个问题──答案他心中有数：她的姓名，年龄和住址。接着问她的职业。
    据她说，她是伊斯坦布尔附近座教会学校的总管，受过专门的护士训练。
    “太太，昨晚发生的案件你该知道了吧？”
    “自然罗。太可怕了。那位美国太太跟我说过，杀人犯确实在她的房里呆过。”
    “太太，听说，最后着见被害者活着的是你，是吗？”
    “不知道，也许是这样。我错开了他的门，把人羞死了。这可是闹了个天大的误会。”
    “你真的见到他？”
    “是的，他在读书。我慌忙道歉，便退出来了。”
    “他跟你说过话吗？”
    她那细嫩的脸颊顿时泛起了红晕。
    “他笑了一下，说了几句话，我──我没听清。”
    “后来你做了些什么事，太太？”波洛问，机智地把话锋一转。
    “我上美国人哈伯德太太的房里去了。向她要几片阿司匹林。她给了我。”
    “她可曾问过你，她的包房与雷切特先生包房相通的那道门是不是闩上的？”
    “问过。”
    “是这样吗？”
    “是的。”
    “后来呢？”
    “后来我回到自己房里，服了阿司匹林就上床了。”
    “那是什么时候？”
    “上床的时候是十一点差五分，我给表上发条前看过时间。”
    “你很快就睡着了？”
    “没有，头痛减轻了些，可还是过了好一阵子才睡着。”
    “你上床前火车就停了吗？”
    “我想，不是的。我以为，在我睡眼朦胧的时候，车在一个什么车站停了一会儿。”
    “大概是文科夫戚吧？这是你的包房，太太？”他指着图问她。
    “不错，是这儿。”
    “你睡的是上铺还是下铺？”
    “十五号，下铺。”
    “有人跟你在同一包房吗？”
    “有的，一位年轻的英国小姐。人长得又好，待人又好。她从巴格达来。”
    “车离开文科夫戚后，她可离开包房？”
    “没有，肯定没离开过。”
    “你既然睡着，凭什么理由肯定她没离开过呢？”
    “我睡得不熟。一有响动，容易惊醒过来。可以肯定，只要她从上铺下来，我非醒过来不可。”
    “你自己可离开过包房？”
    “今天早晨之前没离开过。”
    “你可有一件鲜红的睡衣，太太？”
    “没有。我的睡衣是雅茄呢的，穿着起来挺舒适。”
    “跟你在一起的那位──德贝汉小姐呢？她的睡衣是什么颜色的？”
    “淡紫色。就是东方出售的那种。”
    波洛点点头，然后友好地问：“你为什么作这次旅行？是度假？”
    “是的，我回家度假。不过，我先得去洛桑我妹妹那儿住一两星期。”
    “你是一位好心肠的太太。请你把你妹妹的姓名和住址给我们写下来，也许，不会见怪吧？”
    “非常高兴。”
    她拿起递给她的纸笔，根据要求，把妹妹的姓名和住址一一写了下来。
    “太太，你在美国呆过？”
    “没有。有一次，差点儿就要去了，是陪一位手脚不便的太太去的。临去前，计划变了，还是没去成。我非常懊恼。美国人都是好人，他们花了许多钱办学校、开医院。他们都讲究实际。”
    “你可记得阿姆斯特朗拐骗案？”
    “那是怎么一回事？”
    波洛作了一番解释。
    格莱达•奥尔逊听了很气愤，激动得她那淡黄的卷发也颤动起来。
    “世上竟有这样的坏蛋！简直不能使人相信。这个小女孩的母亲多可怜！谁都会为她难受的。”
    她心肠的瑞典女人走了。她那善良的面孔涨得通红，直伤心得泪水在她的眼眶里打转。
    波洛忙着一张纸上写起来。
    “朋友，你在写什么？”鲍克先生问。
    “我亲爱的，我这个人办事就爱个干净利落，有条不紊。我在列案件进展时间表。”
    写完，他递给鲍克先生。
    ９：１５火车开出贝尔格莱德。
    约９：４０男佣人给雷切特备好安眠药后走了。
    约１０：００麦克昆离开雷切特。
    约１０：４０格莱达•奥尔逊最后一个看见雷切特活着。
注意：他醒着，在看书。
０：１０火车从文科夫戚开出（晚点）。
０：３０火车撞入雪堆。
    ０：３７雷切特的铃响，列车员应声而去，雷切特用法语说：“没什么事，我搞错了。”
    约１：１７哈伯德太太发现房里有人，按铃唤列车员。
    鲍克先生点头称许。
    “写得挺清楚。”他说。
    “上面没有使你感到疑惑不解的地方？”
    “没有。一清二楚，明明白白。案子发生在一点十五分，那是最清楚不过的了。表就是证明，跟哈伯德太太的话也相符。依我的想法，我来推测一下凶手的特征。朋友，听我说。
他必定是那个高个子的意大利人。他从美国──芝加哥──来。别忘了，意大利人就爱用刀子，他给人捅了不止一刀，而是好几刀。”
    “说得有理。”
    “毫无疑问，这便是谜底。显然，他和这个雷切特先生在这件拐骗案中是一伙的。凯赛梯就是个意大利人的名字。后来，雷切特不知怎么来，出卖了他，于是这个意大利人跟踪追迹。开始给他写了恐吓信，最后用这种残忍手段为自己报了他。这事简单明了极了。”
    波洛怀疑地摇了摇头。
    “怕是没那么简单吧。”他咕哝道。
    “我是深信不疑的。”鲍克先生说着，越来越对自己的推论陶醉不已。
    “那么患牙痛的男佣人不是发誓说，意大利人从示离开过自己的包房，这又作何解释？”
    “确实很难解释得通。”
    波洛眨了眨眼睛。
    “可不是，这事真有点蹊跷。雷切特的佣人竟然牙痛过，这一事实对推论很不利，对我们意大利朋友倒帮了很大的忙。”
    “今后自有分晓。”鲍克先生信心十足地说。
    波洛摇了摇头。
    “不，事情复杂着哩！”他嘟哝了一句。
6 THE EVIDENCE OF THE RUSSIAN PRINCESS
6 THE EVIDENCE OF THE RUSSIAN PRINCESS
“Let us hear what Pierre Michel has to say about this button,” he said.
The Wagon Lit conductor was recalled. He looked at them inquiringly.
M. Bouc cleared his throat.
“Michel,” he said, “here is a button from your tunic. It was found in the American lady’s compartment. What have you to say for yourself about it?”
The conductor’s hand went automatically to his tunic. “I have lost no button, Monsieur,” he said. “There must be some mistake.”
“That is very odd.”
“I cannot account for it, Monsieur.” The man seemed astonished, but not in any way guilty or confused.
M. Bouc said meaningly: “Owing to the circumstances in which it was found, it seems fairly certain that this button was dropped by the man who was in Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment last night when she rang the bell.”
“But, Monsieur, there was no one there. The lady must have imagined it.”
“She did not imagine it, Michel. The assassin of M. Ratchett passed that way—and dropped that button.”
As the significance of M. Bouc’s words became plain to him, Pierre Michel flew into a violent state of agitation.
“It is not true, Monsieur; it is not true!” he cried. “You are accusing me of the crime. Me, I am innocent. I am absolutely innocent! Why should I want to kill a Monsieur whom I have never seen before?”
“Where were you when Mrs. Hubbard’s bell rang?”
“I told you, Monsieur, in the next coach talking to my colleague.”
“We will send for him.”
“Do so, Monsieur, I implore you, do so.”
The conductor of the next coach was summoned. He immediately confirmed Pierre Michel’s statement. He added that the conductor from the Bucharest coach had also been there. The three of them had been discussing the situation caused by the snow. They had been talking some ten minutes when Michel fancied he heard a bell. As he opened the doors connecting the two coaches, they had all heard it plainly—a bell ringing repeatedly. Michel had run post-haste to answer it.
“So you see, Monsieur, I am not guilty,” cried Michel anxiously.
“And this button from a Wagon Lit tunic, how do you explain it?”
“I cannot, Monsieur. It is a mystery to me. All my buttons are intact.”
Both of the other conductors also declared that they had not lost a button; also that they had not been inside Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment at any time.
“Calm yourself, Michel,” said M. Bouc, “and cast your mind back to the moment when you ran to answer Mrs. Hubbard’s bell. Did you meet anyone at all in the corridor?”
“No, Monsieur.”
“Did you see anyone going away from you down the corridor in the other direction?”
“Again, no, Monsieur.”
“Odd,” said M. Bouc.
“Not so very,” said Poirot. “It is a question of time. Mrs. Hubbard wakes to find someone in her compartment. For a minute or two she lies paralysed, her eyes shut. Probably it was then that the man slipped out into the corridor. Then she starts ringing the bell. But the conductor does not come at once. It is only the third or fourth peal that he hears. I should say myself that there was ample time—”
“For what? For what, mon cher! Remember, there are thick drifts of snow all round the train.”
“There are two courses open to our mysterious assassin,” said Poirot slowly. “He could retreat into either of the toilets or—he could disappear into one of the compartments.”
“But they were all occupied.”
“Yes.”
“You mean that he could retreat into his own compartment?”
Poirot nodded.
“It fits—it fits;’ murmured M. Bouc. “During that ten minutes’ absence of the conductor, the murderer comes from his own compartment, goes into Ratchett’s, kills him, locks and chains the door on the inside, goes out through Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment, and is back safely in his own compartment by the time the conductor arrives.”
Poirot murmured: “It is not quite so simple as that, my friend. Our friend the doctor here will tell you so.”
With a gesture M. Bouc signified that the three conductors might depart.
“We have still to see eight passengers,” said Poirot. “Five first-class passengers—Princess Dragomiroff, Count and Countess Andrenyi, Colonel Arbuthnot, and Mr. Hardman. Three second-class passengers—Miss Debenham, Antonio Foscarelli, and the lady’s-maid, Fr?ulein Schmidt.”
“Whom will you see first—the Italian?”
“How you harp on your Italian! No, we will start at the top of the tree. Perhaps Madame la Princesse will be so good as to spare us a few moments of her time. Convey that message to her, Michel.”
“Oui, Monsieur,” said the conductor, who was just leaving the car.
“Tell her we can wait on her in her compartment if she does not wish to put herself to the trouble of coming here,” called M. Bouc.
But Princess Dragomiroff declined to take this course. She appeared in the dining-car, inclined her head slightly and sat down opposite Poirot.
Her small toad-like face looked even yellower than the day before. She was certainly ugly, and yet, like the toad, she had eyes like jewels, dark and imperious, revealing latent energy and an intellectual force that could be felt at once.
Her voice was deep, very distinct, with a slight grating quality in it.
She cut short a flowery phrase of apology from M. Bouc.
“You need not offer apologies, Messieurs. I understand a murder has taken place. Naturally you must interview all the passengers. I shall be glad to give you all the assistance in my power.”
“You are most amiable, Madame,” said Poirot.
“Not at all. It is a duty. What do you wish to know?”
“Your full Christian names and address, Madame. Perhaps you would prefer to write them yourself?”
Poirot proffered a sheet of paper and pencil, but the Princess waved them aside.
“You can write it,” she said. “There is nothing difficult. Natalia Dragomiroff, 17 Avenue Kléber, Paris.”
“You are travelling home from Constantinople, Madame?”
“Yes. I have been staying at the Austrian Embassy. My maid is with me.”
“Would you be so good as to give me a brief account of your movements last night from dinner onwards?”
“Willingly. I directed the conductor to make up my bed whilst I was in the dining-car. I retired to bed immediately after dinner. I read until the hour of eleven, when I turned out my light. I was unable to sleep owing to certain rheumatic pains from which I suffer. At about a quarter to one I rang for my maid. She massaged me and then read aloud till I felt sleepy. I cannot say exactly, when she left me. It may have been half an hour afterward, it may have been later.”
“The train had stopped then?”
“The train had stopped.”
“You heard nothing—nothing unusual during the time, Madame?”
“I heard nothing unusual.”
“What is your maids name?”
“Hildegarde Schmidt.”
“She has been with you long?”
“Fifteen years.”
“You consider her trustworthy?”
“Absolutely. Her people come from an estate of my late husband’s in Germany.”
“You have been in America, I presume, Madame?”
The abrupt change of subject made the old lady raise her eyebrows. “Many times.”
“Were you at any time acquainted with a family of the name of Armstrong—a family in which a tragedy occurred?”
With some emotion in her voice the old lady said: “You speak of friends of mine, Monsieur.”
“You knew Colonel Armstrong well, then?”
“I knew him slightly, but his wife, Sonia Armstrong, was my god-daughter. I was on terms of friendship with her mother, the actress, Linda Arden. Linda Arden was a great genius, one of the greatest tragic actresses in the world. As Lady Macbeth, as Magda, there was no one to touch her. I was not only an admirer of her art, I was a personal friend.”
“She is dead?”
“No, no, she is alive, but she lives in complete retirement. Her health is very delicate, and she has to lie on a sofa most of the time.”
“There was, I think, a second daughter?”
“Yes, much younger than Mrs. Armstrong.”
“And she is alive?”
“Certainly.”
“Where is she?”
The old woman bent an acute glance at him.
“I must ask you the reason for these questions. What have they to do with the matter in hand—the murder on this train?”
“They are connected in this way, Madame: the man who was murdered was the man responsible for the kidnapping and murder of Mrs. Armstrong’s child.”
“Ah!”
The straight brows came together. Princess Dragomiroff drew herself a little more erect.
“In my view, then, this murder is an entirely admirable happening! You will pardon my slightly biased point of view.”
“It is most natural, Madame. And now to return to the question you did not answer. Where is the younger daughter of Linda Arden, the sister of Mrs. Armstrong?”
“I honestly cannot tell you, Monsieur. I have lost touch with the younger generation. I believe she married an Englishman some years ago and went to England, but at the moment I cannot recollect the name.”
She paused a minute and then said:
“Is there anything further you want to ask me, gentlemen?”
“Only one thing, Madame, a somewhat personal question. The colour of your dressing-gown.”
She raised her eyebrows slightly. “I must suppose you have a reason for such a question. My dressing-gown is of black satin.”
“There is nothing more, Madame. I am much obliged to you for answering my questions so promptly.”
She made a slight gesture with her heavily beringed hand. Then as she rose, and the others rose with her, she stopped.
“You will excuse me, Monsieur,” she said, “but may I ask your name? Your face is somehow familiar to me.”
“My name, Madame, is Hercule Poirot—at your service.”
She was silent a minute, then: “Hercule Poirot,” she said. “Yes. I remember now. This is Destiny.”
She walked away, very erect, a little stiff in her movements.
“Voilà une grande dame,” said M. Bouc. “What do you think of her, my friend?”
But Hercule Poirot merely shook his head.
“I am wondering,” he said, “what she meant by Destiny.”
第六章　俄国公爵夫人的证词
第六章　俄国公爵夫人的证词
    “我们再来听听皮埃尔•米歇尔对这颗钮扣要说些什么。”波洛说。
    列车员又一次被传了进来。他询问似地打量着他们。
    鲍克先生清了清嗓子。
    “米歇尔，”他说，“这里有一颗钮扣，是你制服上的，在美国老太太房里捡到的。你对这有什么要说的吗？”
    列车员的手机械地摸了摸身上的制服。
    “先生，我可没掉钮扣，”他说，“是不是搞错了。”
    “这倒怪了。”
    “先生，我以为这没什么奇怪的。”
    他显得很惊讶，但完全看不出有罪的样子。
    鲍克先生意味深长地说：
    “从发现这颗钮扣的现场来看，显然，这是昨晚哈伯德太太按铃唤他去的那人身上掉下来的。”
    “可是，先生，那里并没有人呀。必定是老太太臆想出来的。”
    “米歇尔，她并没有瞎说，谋害雷切特的凶手就是经过这条路的──而且还掉下了这颗钮扣。”
    鲍克先生的话的含义一经点明，皮埃尔•米歇尔顿时极度不安起来。
    “这不是事实，先生，这不是事实。”他嚷了起来。
    “你这是指倥我有罪。我有罪吗？我是清白的，绝对清白的。我干吗要杀一个素不相识的先生？”
    “哈伯德太太按铃的时候，你在哪儿？”
    “我已经说过，先生，在另一节车厢里，跟我的同事聊天。”
    “我们会找他的。”
    “去吧，先生，求你找他问问。”
    另一节车厢的列车员被唤了进来。他一口证实皮埃尔•米歇尔的话。还补充道当时布加勒斯特车厢上的列车员也在那儿。全心全意三个人议论这场雪所引起的后果。他们就这么聊了十分种，米歇尔听到铃声。他开了两切车厢之间的那扇门，他们也清楚地听到铃声，米歇尔当即飞快跑回去了。
    “先生，瞧，我是无罪的。”米歇尔焦急地嚷道。
    “钮扣是从列车员制服上掉下的──你有什么可说的？”
    “说不上，先生。对我来说这事也太稀奇了，反正我身上的钮扣一颗也没缺。”
    其他两列车员也声称没掉，从来没去过哈伯德太太的包房。
    “冷静点，米歇尔。”鲍克先生说。“仔细想想，听到哈伯德太太的铃声跑去时的情况。在过道里碰到过什么人没有？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “有没有人朝相反方向跑过去呢？”
    “也没有，先生。”
    “这就怪了。”鲍克先生说。
    “没那么怪吧。”波洛说。“只是时间问题。哈伯德太太醒过来发现房间里有个男人，她一动不动，闭着眼睛，躺了一两分钟。也许就在这个时候，这个人溜进了过道，然后她才按铃。可是列车员没有立刻就去。铃按了三、四次才听到。我敢说，这当中有的是时间──”
    “为什么呢？为什么，我亲爱的？别忘了，火车四周都是雪堆。”
    “这一神秘的凶手有两条路可以选择，”波洛慢吞吞地说，“他可以退到盥洗室，也可以躲到某个包房。”
    “所有的包房都住了人。”
    “说对了。”
    “你的意思是，他回到了自己的包房？”
    波洛点点头。
    “有理，有理。”鲍克先生低声说。“在列车员不在的十分钟里，凶手从自己的房里出来，进入雷切特的房里，然后杀了他，从里面锁上门。并搭好链条，穿过哈伯德太太包房逃出来。在列车员刚要进来的时候，他已安全地回到了自己的包房里了。”
    波洛咕哝道：“朋友，事情不那么简单，我们的大夫就可以作证。”
    鲍克先生作了个手挚，暗示三个列车员可以走了。
    “还有八位旅客得见见。”波洛说，“五位是头等车的──德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，安德烈伯爵夫妇，阿巴思诺特上校以及哈特曼先生；三位二第车的──德贝汉小姐，安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里和女佣人──弗罗琳•施密特。”
    “先见谁──意大利人？”
    “瞧你老惦记着这个意大利人！摘果子还是从树梢上开始吧。也许公爵夫人乐意抽点时间和咱们谈谈。米歇尔，请她来。”
    “是，先生。”列车员转身就走。
    “告诉她，我们可以在她房里谈，要是她觉得这儿来不便的话。”鲍克先生随后对他补充道。
    但是，德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人倒乐意过来。她走了进来，微微把头一偏，就在波洛的对面坐了下来。
    她那瘦小的、癞蛤蟆般的脸孔比过去更黄了。难看极了。此活，象只癞蛤蟆，一对眼睛宝石似的发着光，又黑又神气活现，显示了她那潜在的坚强意志和一眼就可感觉得到的智力。
    她声音深沉，非常清晰，但稍有点刺耳。
    鲍克先生说着动听的话，表示歉意，但被她打断了。
    “先生们，用不着这些客套。我是个明白人。既然发生了谋杀案，你们自然要找旅客谈谈，我乐意尽力帮忙。”
    “夫人，你可真是个好心肠的人。”波洛说。
    “哪里话，这是我应尽的责任。请问你们想要了解些什么？”
    “夫人，请教你的教名和地址，也许你不反对写下来吧？”
    波洛递过去纸和铅笔。可是公爵夫人推到一边。
    “你自己写吧。”她说。“反正一样──娜塔莉娅•德哥米洛夫。巴黎。克莱勃大街十七号。”
    “夫人，你是不是从君士坦丁堡回家的？”
    “是的，我在奥地利使馆呆过，我的女佣人跟着我。”
    “费心，能否将你晚饭后的，也就是整个晚上的活动告诉我们呢？”
    “非常愿意。我在餐车里就吩咐列车员为我铺床，吃完饭就立刻上床了。十一点前，我在看书，此后关了灯就睡了。但是，由于风湿痛，我一直睡不着。一点差一刻，我按铃反女佣人唤来。她给按摩了一会儿，然后读书给我听，后来我睡着了她才离去。确切的时间就不清，多半是一点半，也许更晚些。”
    “火车停了吗？”
    “停了。”
    “当时你没听见异常的声响吧，夫人？”
    “没有。”
    “你的女佣人叫什么名字？”
    “希尔德加德•施密特。”
    “她跟了你很久了吧？”
    “十五年了。”
    “你认为她忠诚可靠吗？”
    “绝对可靠。她是从我那死去的丈夫的德国领地带来的。”
    “我想，你去过美国吧，夫人？”
    话题突然一转，老太太的眉毛蹙了起来。
    “多次啦。”
    “你可认褒阿姆斯特朗一家──可悲的一家？”
    “你是指我的朋友吧，先生。”
    “如此说来，你与陛绿斯特朗上校很熟了，是吧？”
    “他这个人我有点熟；他的太太索妮娅•阿姆斯特朗是我的教女。她的母亲，琳达•阿登是个演员，与我交情很深。琳达•阿登是个大天才，举世闻名的悲剧演员，麦克贝西女士和玛格达都及不上她。我不只是她的艺术崇拜者，还是她的挚友呢。”
    “她已经去世了吧？”
    “不，不，她还活着，不过已深居简出。她的身体已经不行了，大部分时间都消磨在沙发上。”
    “我想，她有两个女儿吧？”
    “是的，是的，小女儿比阿绿斯特朗太太年轻多了。”
    “她还活着？”
    “那自然。”
    “在哪儿？”
    老太太敏锐地看了他一眼。
    “我倒要请教一下，你为什么要向我提这些问题──跟眼前的案子──车上的谋杀案有什么相干？”
    “夫人，关系可深哩。车上被杀害的那个人就是拐骗阿姆斯特太太女儿的主要凶手。”
    “啊！”
    德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人直直的眉毛蹙得更紧，身子稍稍挺了挺。
    “依我看，这起谋杀案干得叫人拍手称快呢！不过，请原谅，我的观点过于偏激了。”
    “夫人，这是很自然的。现在让我们回过头来谈谈你未回答的问题。琳达•阿登的小女儿，阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹，现在在哪儿？”
    “实在不知道，先生。我跟年轻的一辈早就没有往来了。我相信，数年前与一位英国绅士结了婚，到英国去了。遗憾的是，至今想不起他的姓名。”
    她停了一会，接着说：“先生，还有什么要问我的吗？”
    “夫人，还有一件事。纯粹是个人琐事。请问你睡衣的颜色？”
    她略略扬了扬眉毛。
    “猜想起来，你提这类问题必定是事出有因的。我的睡衣是蓝缎的。”
    “夫人，不想再来打扰你了。十分感谢你对我们的问题回答得如此干净利落。”
    她那戴满沉甸甸的手饰的手稍稍做了个姿势。
    随后她站起来，大家也跟着站起来。但她收住脚步，没有走。
    “先生，请原谅。”她说。“请教先生大名？你这人好面熟。”
    “夫人，我叫赫卡尔•波洛──有什么吩咐？”
    她沉默片刻，接着说：“赫卡尔•波洛，”她说，“啊，想起来了，这是命中注定。”
    她走了。身子挺得很直，但步履有点艰难。
    “是位贵妇人。”鲍克先生说，“朋友，你觉得她怎么样？”
    赫卡尔•波洛只是摇摇头。
    “我正在捉摸，”他说，“她说‘命中注定’，这是什么意思？”
7 THE EVIDENCE OF COUNT AND COUNTESS ANDRENYI
7 THE EVIDENCE OF COUNT AND COUNTESS ANDRENYI
Count and Countess Andrenyi were next summoned. The Count, however, entered the dining-car alone.
There was no doubt that he was a fine-looking man seen face to face. He was at least six feet in height, with broad shoulders and slender hips. He was dressed in very well-cut English tweeds and might have been taken for an Englishman had it not been for the length of his moustache and something in the line of the cheekbone.
“Well, Messieurs,” he said, “what can I do for you?”
“You understand, Monsieur,” said Poirot, “that in view of what has occurred I am obliged to put certain questions to all the passengers.”
“Perfectly, perfectly,” said the Count easily. “I quite understand your position. Not, I fear, that my wife and I can do much to assist you. We were asleep and heard nothing at all.”
“Are you aware of the identity of the deceased, Monsieur?”
“I understood it was the big American—a man with a decidedly unpleasant face. He sat at that table at meal times.” He indicated with a nod of his head the table at which Ratchett and MacQueen had sat.
“Yes, yes, Monsieur, you are perfectly correct. I meant—did you know the name of the man?”
“No.” The Count looked thoroughly puzzled by Poirot’s queries.
“If you want to know his name,” he said, “surely it is on his passport?”
“The name on his passport is Ratchett,” said Poirot. “But that, Monsieur, is not his real name. He is the man Cassetti, who was responsible for a celebrated kidnapping outrage in America.”
He watched the Count closely as he spoke, but the latter seemed quite unaffected by this piece of news. He merely opened his eyes a little.
“Ah!” he said. “That certainly should throw light upon the matter. An extraordinary country, America.”
“You have been there, perhaps, Monsieur le Comte?”
“I was in Washington for a year.”
“You knew, perhaps, the Armstrong family?”
“Armstrong—Armstrong—it is difficult to recall. One met so many.” He smiled, shrugged his shoulders. “But to come back to the matter in hand, gentlemen,” he said. “What more can I do to assist you?”
“You retired to rest—when, Monsieur le Comte?”
Hercule Poirot’s eyes stole to his plan. Count and Countess Andrenyi occupied compartment Nos. 12 and 13 adjoining.
“We had one compartment made up for the night whilst we were in the dining-car. On returning we sat in the other for a while—”
“Which number would that be?”
“No. 13. We played piquet together. At about eleven o’clock my wife retired for the night. The conductor made up my compartment and I also went to bed. I slept soundly until morning.”
“Did you notice the stopping of the train?”
“I was not aware of it till this morning.”
“And your wife?”
The Count smiled. “My wife always takes a sleeping draught when travelling by train. She took her usual dose of trional.”
He paused. “I am sorry I am not able to assist you in any way.”
Poirot passed him a sheet of paper and a pen.
“Thank you, Monsieur le Comte. It is a formality, but will you just let me have your name and address?”
The Count wrote slowly and carefully.
“It is just as well that I should write this for you,” he said pleasantly. “The spelling of my country estate is a little difficult for those unacquainted with the language.”
He passed the paper across to Poirot and rose.
“It will be quite unnecessary for my wife to come here,” he said. “She can tell you nothing more than I have.”
A little gleam came into Poirot’s eye.
“Doubtless, doubtless,” he said. “But all the same I think I should like to have just one little word with Madame la Comtesse.”
“I assure you it is quite unnecessary.” The Count’s voice rang out authoritatively.
Poirot blinked gently at him.
“It will be a mere formality,” he said. “But, you understand, it is necessary for my report.”
“As you please.”
The Count gave way grudgingly. He made a short foreign bow and left the dining-car.
Poirot reached out a hand to a passport. It set out the Count’s names and titles. He passed on to the further information. “Accompanied by, wife; Christian name, Elena Maria; maiden name, Goldenberg; age, twenty.” A spot of grease had been dropped on it at some time by a careless official.
“A diplomatic passport,” said M. Bouc. “We must be careful, my friend, to give no offence. These people can have nothing to do with the murder.”
“Be easy, mon vieux, I will be most tactful. A mere formality.”
His voice dropped as the Countess Andrenyi entered the dining-car. She looked timid and extremely charming.
“You wish to see me, Messieurs?”
“A mere formality, Madam la Comtesse.” Poirot rose gallantly, bowed her into the seat opposite him. “It is only to ask you if you saw or heard anything last night that may throw light upon this matter.”
“Nothing at all, Monsieur. I was asleep.”
“You did not hear, for instance, a commotion going on in the compartment next to yours? The American lady who occupies it had quite an attack of hysterics and rang for the conductor.”
“I heard nothing, Monsieur. You see, I had taken a sleeping draught.”
“Ah! I comprehend. Well, I need not detain you further.” Then, as she rose swiftly—“Just one little minute. These particulars—your maiden name, age and so on—they are correct?”
“Quite correct, Monsieur.”
“Perhaps you will sign this memorandum to that effect, then.”
She signed quickly, in a graceful slanting hand-writing—Elena Andrenyi.
“Did you accompany your husband to America, Madame?”
“No, Monsieur.” She smiled, flushed a little. “We were not married then; we have been married only a year.”
“Ah, yes, thank you, Madame. By the way, does your husband smoke?”
She stared at him as she stood poised for departure.
“Yes.”
“A pipe?”
“No. Cigarettes and cigars.”
“Ah! Thank you.”
She lingered, her eyes watching him curiously. Lovely eyes they were, dark and almond-shaped with very long black lashes that swept the exquisite pallor of her cheeks. Her lips, very scarlet in the foreign fashion, were parted just a little. She looked exotic and beautiful.
“Why did you ask me that?”
“Madame,” Poirot waved an airy hand, “detectives have to ask all sorts of questions. For instance, perhaps you will tell me the colour of your dressing-gown?”
She stared at him. Then she laughed. “it is corn-coloured chiffon. Is that really important?”
“Very important, Madame.”
She asked curiously: “Are you really a detective, then?”
“At your service, Madame.”
“I thought there were no detectives on the train when it passed through Jugo-Slavia—not until one got to Italy.”
“I am not a Jugo-Slavian detective, Madame. I am an international detective.”
“You belong to the League of Nations?”
“I belong to the world, Madame,” said Poirot dramatically. He went on: “I work mainly in London. You speak English?” he added in that language.
“I speak a leetle, yes.” Her accent was charming. Poirot bowed once more.
“We will not detain you further, Madame. You see, it was not so very terrible.”
She smiled, inclined her head and departed.
“Elle est jolie femme,” said M. Bouc appreciatively. He sighed. “Well, that did not advance us much.”
“No,” said Poirot. “Two people who saw nothing and heard nothing.”
“Shall we now see the Italian?”
Poirot did not reply for a moment. He was studying a grease spot on a Hungarian diplomatic passport.
第七章　伯爵夫妇的证词
第七章　伯爵夫妇的证词             
    接着要传见的是伯爵夫妇。可是，来的只有伯爵一人。正眼望去，他无疑是个英俊的人物。身高至少有六英尺，宽宽的肩膀，柔软的身腰。英国式花呢上装裁剪得十分合身。要是不看他那长长的小胡子以及颧骨线条的某些特征，当真以为他是个道地的英国人哩。
    “我说，先生，”他说，“我能为你们做些什么呢？”
    “是这么一回事，先生。”波洛说，“鉴于发生这么一起案子，我想向所有的旅客问些问题。”
    “好极了，好极了。”伯爵轻快地说，“我很了解你们的处境。遗憾的是，我和我的妻子怕不可能对你们有多大的帮助。我们睡着了，对情况一无所知。”
    “先生，你对死者可有印象？”
    “据我所知，他是个高大的美国人，长着一张非常讨厌的脸。吃饭时他总爱坐在那张桌子上。”
    波洛点点头，示意他知道是那张雷切特和麦克昆常坐的桌子。
    “是的，是的，先生，你说得对极了。我想问，你可知道他的姓名？”
    “要是你想知道他的姓名，”他说，“护照上肯定有的。”
    “护照上写的是雷切特，”波洛说，“可是，先生，那不是真名，他就是凯赛梯，那个轰动美国的拐骗案的凶犯。”
    他边说，边仔细地观察伯爵。可是伯爵对这消息竟无动于衷，只是眼睛略睁大些。
    “哦，”他说，“这下可真像大白了，美国可真是个奇特的国家。”
    “伯爵阁下，也许你去过美国吧？”
    “我在华盛顿呆过一年。”
    “也许你认识阿姆斯特朗一家？”
    “阿姆斯特朗──阿姆斯特朗──很难叫人想得起是那一个──碰到的实在是太多了。”
    他耸耸肩，微微一笑。
    “先生，至于这起案件，”他说，“我还有什么可为你效劳的？”
    “伯爵阁下，你是什么时候上床安歇的？”
    波洛偷偷地瞟了平面图一眼。安德烈伯爵夫妇住在彼此相通的１２号和１３号包房。
    “早在餐车里时，我们就让人铺好了一个包房的铺，回来后我们就在另一个包房坐了一会──”
    “哪一间？”
    “十三号。我们玩了一会牌。十一时左右，我的妻子去睡了。列车员为我铺好床，我也睡了。直到天亮前，我都睡得很熟。”
    “你可注意到火车停了？”
    “到了早晨我们才知道。”
    “你的太太呢？”
    伯爵微微一笑。
    “外出坐车旅行时，我的妻子常服安眠药。她和往常一样，服了点台俄那。”
    他不再作声。
    “很遗憾，我帮不了你们忙。”
    波洛把纸笔递给他。
    “多谢阁下，这是例行公事。能不能写下你的姓名和地址？”
    伯爵字写得很慢，一笔一划十分仔细。
    “为你们我只能这么个写法。”他轻快地说。“不熟悉这种文字的人，对我国庄园名称的拼法可不容易辨认。”
    他把纸还给波洛，便直起身来。
    “我的妻子完全没有必要到这里来。”他说，“她知道的不会比我多。”
    波洛的眼睛微微一亮。
    “那自然，那自然。”他说，“不过，我想，无论如何得与伯爵夫人稍微谈一下。”
    “肯定没有这个必要。”他说得很坚决。
    波洛温和地向他眨眨眼。
    “只不过是例行公事。”他说，“可是，你也了解，这对案件的处理却很有必要。”
    “随你的便吧。”
    他勉强作了让步，随便地行了个外国礼，走出餐车。
    波洛伸手拿过来一份护照，上面记载着伯爵的姓名及其他一些项目。他一页一页翻阅下去。了解到陪伴他的是他的妻，教名：爱琳娜•玛丽亚；娘家姓戈尔登伯格；年龄：二十。
不知哪位粗心的办事员什么时候把一滴油迹弄在上面。
    “这是份外文护照。”鲍克先生说。“留神，朋友，免得惹事生非。这种人跟谋杀案是沾不上边的。”
    “放心好了，我的老朋友，我办事精细着呢。例行公事，仅此而已。”
    一见安德烈伯爵夫人进来，他就把话刹住了。她怯生生的，煞是动人。
    “诸位先生，你们想见我？”
    “伯爵夫人阁下，例行公事而已。”波洛殷勤地站了起来，拽着对面的座位，对她弯了弯腰。“只是问问昨晚你有没有听到或看到什么动静。这对弄清案件可能有所帮助。”
    “先生，什么也没有，我睡着了。”
    “比如说，有没有听到隔壁包房什么骚乱声？那边住着美国太太神经紧张过一阵子，还按铃唤列车员。”
    “先生，我什么也没听到。你是知道的，我服过安眠药。”
    “啊！我明白过来了。看来我们不必再耽搁你了。”可是，等她迅速地立身，又说：
“稍等片刻──还有点小小的事。你的娘家姓、年龄等这上面没错吧？”
    “很正确，先生。”
    “也许你能在这个要点摘录上签个字？”
    她签得很快，一手漂亮的斜体字：
    爱琳娜•安德烈。
    “夫人，你可曾陪你的丈夫去过美国？”
    “不，先生，”她笑了，脸上飞起淡淡的红晕。“那时我们还没结婚呢。我们结婚才一年。”
    “明白了，多谢，夫人。顺便问一问，你的丈夫抽烟吗？”
    她刚起身要走，盯了波洛一眼。
    “抽的。”
    “抽烟斗？”
    “纸烟或才雪茄。”
    “唔，多谢。”
    她没有立刻就走，眼睛好奇地打量着他。好一双迷人的眼睛！乌黑乌黑的杏眼，长而黑的睫毛，配在白皙的脸上。鲜红的嘴唇，微微启开，纯粹是异国人的打扮。她身上异国情调很浓，人也长得很美。
    “为什么要问我这种事？”
    “夫人，”波洛把手轻轻一摊，“我们干侦探这行的，什么事都要问问。比如说，能不能告诉我你睡衣的颜色？”
    她看了他一眼，笑开了。
    “米色雪心绸的。这也很重要？”
    “是的，夫人，很重要。”
    她好奇地问：“那么，你当真是个侦探？”
    “听候你的吩咐，夫人。”
    “我还以为车不过南斯拉夫不会有侦探，只有到了意大利才来呢。”
    “我不是南斯拉夫的侦探，夫人，我是全球人。”
    “你是属于国联的吧？”
    “我属于全世界，夫人。”波洛戏剧性地说，“我的工作主要在伦敦。你会英语吗？”
他用英语补充了一句。
    “是的，会点儿。”
    她的音调很美。
    波洛再次鞠了个躬。
    “夫人，不再打扰你了。你瞧，事情并不那么可怕。”
    她微微一笑，偏了一下头告辞了。
    “她是个漂亮的女人。”鲍克先生赞许地说。
    他叹了一口气。
    “结果，进展不大。”
    “不，”波洛说，“这一对什么也没看到，什么也没听到。”
    “现在该找那个意大利人谈谈，可以吗？”
    她一会波洛没有回答。他在研究匈牙利人外交护照上的油迹呢。
8 THE EVIDENCE OF COLONEL ARBUTHNOT
8 THE EVIDENCE OF COLONEL ARBUTHNOT
Poirot roused himself with a slight start. His eyes twinkled a little as they met the eager ones of M. Bouc.
“Ah! my dear old friend,” he said, “you see I have become what they call the snob! The first class, I feel it should be attended to before the second class. Next, I think, we will interview the good-looking Colonel Arbuthnot.”
Finding the Colonel’s French to be of a severely limited description, Poirot conducted his interrogatory in English.
Arbuthnot’s name, age, home address and exact military standing were all ascertained. Poirot proceeded:
“It is that you come home from India on what is called the leave—what we can call en permission?”
Colonel Arbuthnot, uninterested in what a pack of foreigners called anything, replied with true British brevity, “Yes.”
“But you do not come home on the P. & O. boat?”
“No.”
“Why not?”
“I chose to come by the overland route for reasons of my own.”
(“And that,” his manner seemed to say, “is one for you, you interfering little jackanapes.”)“You came straight through from India?”
The Colonel replied drily: “I stopped for one night to see Ur of the Chaldees, and for three days in Baghdad with the A.O.C., who happens to be an old friend of mine.”
“You stopped three days in Baghdad. I understand that the young English lady, Miss Debenham, also comes from Baghdad. Perhaps you met her there?”
“No, I did not. I first met Miss Debenham when she and I shared the railway convoy car from Kirkuk to Nissibin.”
Poirot leaned forward. He became persuasive and a little more foreign than he need have been.
“Monsieur, I am about to appeal to you. You and Miss Debenham are the only two English people on the train. It is necessary that I should ask you each your opinion of the other.”
“Highly irregular,” said Colonel Arbuthnot coldly.
“Not so. You see, this crime, it was most probably committed by a woman. The man was stabbed no fewer than twelve times. Even the chef de train said at once, ‘It is a woman.’ Well, then, what is my first task? To give all the women travelling on the Istanbul-Calais coach what Americans call the ‘once-over.’ But to judge of an Englishwoman is difficult. They are very reserved, the English. So I appeal to you, Monsieur, in the interest of justice. What sort of person is this Miss Debenham? What do you know about her?”
“Miss Debenham,” said the Colonel with some warmth, “is a lady.”
“Ah!” said Poirot with every appearance of being much gratified. “So you do not think that she is likely to be implicated in this crime?”
“The idea is absurd,” said Arbuthnot. “The man was a perfect stranger—she had never seen him before.”
“Did she tell you so?”
“She did. She commented at once upon his somewhat unpleasant appearance. If a woman is concerned, as you seem to think (to my mind without any evidence but on a mere assumption), I can assure you that Miss Debenham could not possibly be implicated.”
“You feel warmly in the matter,” said Poirot with a smile.
Colonel Arbuthnot gave him a cold stare. “I really don’t know what you mean,” he said.
The stare seemed to abash Poirot. He dropped his eyes and began fiddling with the papers in front of him.
“All this is by the way,” he said. “Let us be practical and come to facts. This crime, we have reason to believe, took place at a quarter past one last night. It is part of the necessary routine to ask everyone on the train what he or she was doing at that time.”
“Quite so. At a quarter past one, to the best of my belief, I was talking to the young American fellow—secretary to the dead man.”
“Ah! were you in his compartment, or was he in yours?”
“I was in his.”
“That is the young man of the name of MacQueen?”
“Yes.”
“He was a friend or acquaintance of yours?”
“No, I never saw him before this journey. We fell into casual conversation yesterday and both became interested. I don’t as a rule like Americans—haven’t any use for ’em—”
Poirot smiled, remembering MacQueen’s strictures on “Britishers.”
“—but I liked this young fellow. He’d got hold of some tomfool idiotic ideas about the situation in India. That’s the worst of Americans—they’re so sentimental and idealistic. Well, he was interested in what I had to tell him. I’ve had nearly thirty years’ experience of the country. And I was interested in what he had to tell me about the working of Prohibition in America. Then we got down to world politics in general. I was quite surprised to look at my watch and find it was a quarter to two.”
“That is the time you broke up this conversation?”
“Yes.”
“What did you do then?”
“Walked along to my own compartment and turned in.”
“Your bed was made up ready?”
“Yes.”
“That is the compartment—let me see—No. 15—the one next but one to the end away from the dining-car?”
“Yes.”
“Where was the conductor when you went to your compartment?”
“Sitting at the end at a little table. As a matter of fact MacQueen called him just as I went in to my own compartment.”
“Why did he call him?”
“To make up his bed, I suppose. The compartment hadn’t been made up for the night.”
“Now, Colonel Arbuthnot, I want you to think carefully. During the time you were talking to Mr. MacQueen, did anyone pass along the corridor outside the door?”
“A good many people, I should think. I wasn’t paying attention.”
“Ah! but I am referring to—let us say, the last hour and a half of your conversation. You got out at Vincovci, didn’t you?”
“Yes, but only for about a minute. There was a blizzard on. The cold was something frightful. Made one quite thankful to get back to the fug, though as a rule I think the way these trains are overheated is something scandalous.”
M. Bouc sighed. “It is very difficult to please everybody,” he said. “The English they open everything—then others they come along and shut everything. It is very difficult.”
Neither Poirot nor Colonel Arbuthnot paid any attention to him.
“Now, Monsieur, cast your mind back,” said Poirot encouragingly. “It was cold outside. You have returned to the train. You sit down again, you smoke—perhaps a cigarette—perhaps a pipe—”
He paused for the fraction of a second.
“A pipe for me. MacQueen smoked cigarettes.”
“The train starts again. You smoke your pipe. You discuss the state of Europe—of the world. It is late now. Most people have retired for the night. Does anyone pass the door? Think.”
Arbuthnot frowned in the effort of remembrance.
“Difficult to say,” he said. “You see I wasn’t paying any attention.”
“But you have the soldier’s observation for detail. You notice without noticing, so to speak.”
The Colonel thought again, but shook his head.
“I couldn’t say. I don’t remember anyone passing except the conductor. Wait a minute—and there was a woman, I think.”
“You saw her? Was she old—young?”
“Didn’t see her. Wasn’t looking that way. just a rustle and a sort of smell of scent.”
“Scent? A good scent?”
“Well, rather fruity, if you know what I mean. I mean you’d smell it a hundred yards away. But mind you,” the Colonel went on hastily, “this may have been earlier in the evening. You see, as you said just now, it was just one of those things you notice without noticing, so to speak. Some time that evening I said to myself—‘Woman—scent—got it on pretty thick.’ But when it was I can’t be sure, except that—why, yes, it must have been after Vincovci.”
“Why?”
“Because I remember—sniffing, you know—just when I was talking about the utter washout Stalin’s Five Year Plan was turning out. I know the idea woman brought the idea of the position of women in Russia into my mind. And I know we hadn’t got on to Russia until pretty near the end of our talk.”
“You can’t pin it down more definitely than that?”
“N-no. It must have been roughly within the last half-hour.”
“It was after the train had stopped?”
The other nodded. “Yes, I’m almost sure it was.”
“Well, we will pass from that. Have you ever been in America, Colonel Arbuthnot?”
“Never. Don’t want to go.”
“Did you ever know a Colonel Armstrong?”
“Armstrong—Armstrong—I’ve known two or three Armstrongs. There was Tommy Armstrong in the 60th—you don’t mean him? And Selby Armstrong—he was killed on the Somme.”
“I mean the Colonel Armstrong who married an American wife and whose only child was kidnapped and killed.”
“Ah, yes, I remember reading about that—shocking affair. I don’t think I actually ever came across the fellow, though of course I knew of him. Toby Armstrong. Nice fellow. Everybody liked him. He had a very distinguished career. Got the V.C.”
“The man who was killed last night was the man responsible for the murder of Colonel Armstrong’s child.”
Arbuthnot’s face grew rather grim. “Then in my opinion the swine deserved what he got. Though I would have preferred to see him properly hanged—or electrocuted, I suppose, over there.”
“In fact, Colonel Arbuthnot, you prefer law and order to private vengeance?”
“Well, you can’t go about having blood feuds and stabbing each other like Corsicans or the Mafia,” said the Colonel. “Say what you like, trial by jury is a sound system.”
Poirot looked at him thoughtfully for a minute or two.
“Yes,” he said. I am sure that would be your view. Well, Colonel Arbuthnot, I do not think there is anything more I have to ask you. There is nothing you yourself can recall last night that in any way snuck you—or shall we say strikes you now, looking back—as suspicious?”
Arbuthnot considered for a moment or two.
“No,” he said. “Nothing at all. Unless—” he hesitated.
“But yes, continue, I pray of you.”
“Well, it’s nothing really,” said the Colonel slowly. “But you said anything.”
“Yes, yes. Go on.”
“Oh! it’s nothing. A mere detail. But as I got back to my compartment I noticed that the door of the one beyond mine—the end one, you know—”
“Yes, No. 16.”
“Well, the door of it was not quite closed. And the fellow inside peered out in a furtive sort of way. Then he pulled the door to quickly. Of course I know there’s nothing in that—but it just struck me as a bit odd. I mean, it’s quite usual to open a door and stick your head out if you want to see anything. But it was the furtive way he did it that caught my attention.”
“Ye-es,” said Poirot doubtfully.
“I told you there was nothing to it,” said Arbuthnot, apologetically. “But you know what it is—early hours of the morning—everything very still. The thing had a sinister look—like a detective story. All nonsense really.”
He rose. “Well, if you don’t want me any more—”
“Thank you, Colonel Arbuthnot, there is nothing else.”
The soldier hesitated for a minute. His first natural distaste for being questioned by “foreigners” had evaporated.
“About Miss Debenham,” he said rather awkwardly. “You can take it from me that she’s all right. She’s a pukka sahib.”
Flushing a little, he withdrew.
“What,” asked Dr. Constantine with interest, “does a pukka sahib mean?”
“It means,” said Poirot, “that Miss Debenham’s father and brothers were at the same kind of school as Colonel Arbuthnot was.”
“Oh! said Dr. Constantine, disappointed. “Then it has nothing to do with the crime at all.”
“Exactly,”, said, Poirot.
He fell into a reverie, beating a light tattoo on the table. Then he looked up.
“Colonel Arbuthnot smokes a pipe,” he said. “In the compartment of Mr. Ratchett I found a pipe-cleaner. Mr. Ratchett smoked only cigars.”
“You think—?”
“He is the only man so far who admits to smoking a pipe. And he knew of Colonel Armstrong—perhaps actually did know him, though he won’t admit it.”
“So you think it possible—?”
Poirot shook his head violently.
“That is just it—it is impossible—quite impossible—that an honourable, slightly stupid, upright Englishman should stab an enemy twelve times with a knife! Do you not feel, my friends, how impossible it is?”
“That is the psychology,” said M. Bouc.
“And one must respect the psychology. This crime has a signature, and it is certainly not the signature of Colonel Arbuthnot. But now to our next interview.”
This time M. Bouc did not mention the Italian. But he thought of him.
第八章　阿巴思诺特上校的证词
第八章　阿巴思诺特上校的证词             
    波洛微微一惊，抬起头来，目光正与焦急的鲍克先生相遇，便滑稽地眨了眨眼。
    “啊，亲爱的朋友，”他说，“瞧，我果真成了所谓的势利眼了！头等车的人那原是我们首先要会见的呀。下一个我们就会会那位英俊的阿巴思诺特上校吧。”
    一旦发现这位上校的法语实在不行，波洛就用英语与他交谈。问过姓名、年龄、家庭住址以及确切的军衔。波洛接着问他：“你这是从印度回家休假──我们称之谓军休──的吧？”
    阿巴思诺特上校对这帮外国佬的怎么称呼之类并不感兴趣，他用道地的英国式的简短回答答复：
    “是。”
    “可是，你不坐邮般回家？”
    “是的。”
    “为什么？”
    “出于我个人的原因，才选择陆路。”
    “这就是，”他的神情好象是在说，“给你的回答，你们这群多管闲事的小猢狲。”
    “直接从印度来的？”
    上校又冷冷地回答：“为了游览迦勒底人的发祥地，在那儿逗留了一夜，在巴格达跟Ａ•Ｏ•Ｃ一起住了三天，他碰巧是我的一位老朋友。”
    “在巴格达逗留了三夜。据我所知，那位年轻的英国姑娘，德贝汉小姐也是从巴格达来，也许你们是在那里相遇的吧？”
    “不，不是。我首次遇见她是从基尔库克到纳希本的火车上。”
    波洛把身子向前一探，此刻他变得更加谆谆善诱，而且稍微带了点不必要的外国味儿。
    “先生，我想提醒你，你和德贝汉小姐是车上仅有的两位英国人。我以为有必要问问你们彼此的看法。”
    “太无聊了。”阿巴思诺特上校冷冷地答道。
    “可不能这么说。你要知道，这一谋杀案很可能出自女人之手。被害者被刺了至少十二刀。哪怕是列车长也会毫不犹豫地说：‘是女人干的’。那么，我的首要任务是什么呢？对那些坐伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢的全部女旅客都得聊几句──美国人称之谓‘看望一下’──但是要判断英国女人是委难的。她们都很含蓄，所以我指望你，先生，能以公正为重。这位德贝汉小姐是个什么样的人？对她你知道些什么？”
    “德贝汉小姐，”上校有点激动，“是位女士。”
    “啊！”波洛显得很满意，“如此说来，你认为，她跟这案件并无牵连了。”
    “这种看法荒谬之极，”阿巴思诺特上校说，“那个男人跟她素不相识──她从未见过他。”
    “是她告诉你的吗？”
    “是的。他那模样立刻就使她讨厌。要是你认为这是出自女人之手（依我看，毫无根据，纯属猜想），我敢断定，德贝汉小姐不可能被牵址进去。”
    “对这种事你太温情了。”波洛笑着说。
    阿巴思诺特上校冷冷地盯了他一眼。
    “我一点儿也不明白你的意思。”他说。
    他这一眼似乎使波洛感到狼狈。他低下头翻弄着面前的资料。
    “只是随便说说。”他说。“我们还是实际点，回头谈谈案子的事。我们有理由相信，这一案件发生在昨晚一点一刻。询问车上的旅客，他或她当时在做什么，这是必不可少的一种程序。”
    “那是自然。据我记忆，一点一刻我正和那年轻的美国人──被害者的秘书在聊天。”
    “唔！是在你的房里，还是他的房里？”
    “他的房里。”
    “那年轻的美国人名叫麦克昆吧？”
    “是的。”
    “他是你的朋友还是什么人？”
    “不，在这以前我从未见过他。昨天我们偶然相识，随便聊天，彼此很投机。通常我是不喜欢美国人的──挺讨厌这班人。”
    波洛想起麦克昆对英国人地责难，不禁笑了。
    “──可是，我挺喜欢这位年轻人。他对印度的情况的看法傻透了；这些美国人真要不得──他们容易动感情，都是空想家。可他对我所说的事倒感兴趣。对那个国家我有近三十年的经验，他跟我谈的有关美国的经济状况我倒也感兴趣。后来我们泛泛地议论世界政治什么的，一看表已经是二点差一刻了，我大吃一惊。”
    “这就是你们结束谈话的时间了？”
    “是的。”
    “后来你做什么去了？”
    “回到自己的房里，熄灯睡了。”
    “你的床早铺好了？”
    “是的。”
    “你是在──让我看看──十五号包房远离餐车一头的第二个包房，是吗？”
    “是的。”
    “你回包房的时候，列车员在哪儿？”
    “坐在尽头的一张小桌边。事实上我一回到包房，麦克昆就唤他去了。”
    “他为什么唤他去？”
    “我想是让他铺床。床还没铺呢。”
    “阿巴思诺特上校，请你仔细想想，在你跟麦克昆先生谈话的时候，外面过道上可有人走动？”
    “多着呢，我想。我可没留意。”
    “啊！不过我的意思是──我指的是你们谈话最后一个半小时。你在文科夫戚下过车，是吗？”
    “是的，但时间很短。暴风雪还在刮，冷得要命。宁可回去受闷的好，虽然我往往认为这种列车免不了闷热得叫人受不了。”
    鲍克先生叹了一口气。
    “要做到从满意，可真难呀。”他说，“英国人总喜欢什么都要打开来──别人呢，跑过来一样一样地关好。实在难。”
    无论是波洛还是阿巴思诺特上校都没留意他在说什么。
    “先生，回想一下，”波洛鼓励他，“外面很冷，你只好回到车子上，你又坐下来抽烟──也许是支纸烟，也许是烟斗──”
    “我用烟斗，麦克昆先生抽纸烟。”
    “火车又开了。你抽你的烟斗，你们议论欧洲局势──还在世界局势──已经很迟了，大多数人都睡了。想想吧，有人从门口经过吗？”
    阿巴思诺特上校皱起眉头苦苦地想着。
    “很难说，”他说，“我已经跟你说过，我没留意。”
    “不过，作为一个军人，你有观察事物的训练，因此无意间就可发现些什么。”
    上校又想了一会，但摇了摇头。
    “说不上，除了列车员，真记不起还有谁走过。且慢，想起来了，还有一个女人。”
    “你见了？年轻的还是上了年纪的？”
    “没见到人。没朝那边看。只听得一阵嗦嗦和一种香水味儿。”
    “香水味儿？香吗？”
    “可不是，果子味。懂得我的意思吗？我指的是一百码开外就可以闻到。不过要知道，”上校急急忙忙接着说，“这很可能是昨晚早些时候的事。正如刚才你说过的那样，这不过是无意间留意到的一桩事儿。可以这么说吧，昨晚有时我暗想，‘女人──香水味──味儿挺浓──’可是，除了上面一些话，那是什么时间我不能肯定。但──是的，必然是离开文科夫戚以后的事。”
    “有什么根据？”
    “我想起来了──当时我深深地吸了一口气，是这么一回事──我正议论斯大林五年计划遭到惨败已成定局，我知道是这个话题──女人──我想到了俄国女人的处境来。这个话题我们一直议论到谈话结束。”
    “你能不能说得更确切点？”
    “说不上，也许在最后的半个小时。”
    “火车停了以后？”
    对方点点头。
    “不错，我完全可以肯定。”
    “这个，暂且不谈。阿巴思诺特上校，你去过美国吗？”
    “从来没去过，也不想去。”
    “你可认识一位阿姆斯特朗上校？”
    “阿姆斯特朗──阿姆斯特朗──我认识二、三个这种姓的人。有个汤米•阿姆斯特朗，六十师的──你指的是他？还有一位奥尔比•阿姆斯特朗，他在索姆被人杀害了。”
    “我指的这个阿姆斯特朗上校，他曾娶了一个美国人为妻，他的独生被人拐去杀害了。”
    “唔，有这么一个人，记起来了。有什么地方读到过──可真惨呀。并不是说我同他有过往来。不过听说过。托比•阿姆斯特朗，很不错的一个人，谁都喜欢他。前途无量，得过十字勋章。”
    “昨晚被杀的就杀害阿姆斯特朗女儿的凶手。”
    阿巴思诺特的脸色十争阴沉。
    “那么，就是说这头猪猡是罪有应得罗。要是我，宁可把他绞死──要么，让他受电刑。”
    “事实上，阿巴思诺特上校，你不是赞成法律和秩序而反对报私仇的吗？”
    “哦，你可不能象科西嘉人和黑手党呀！”上校说。“随你喜欢。不过审判制度毕竟是健全的制度。”
    波洛仔细地打量他一两分钟。
    “是的，”他说。“这是你的观点。阿巴思诺特上校。我想没有什么要追问的了。那么昨晚没有什么东西给你留下印象──还是，可以这么说吧，有什么东西引起你的怀疑呢？”
    阿巴思诺特上校思索了一两分钟。
    “没有，”他说，“什么也没有，除非──”他犹豫了。
    “请说下去，请吧。”
    “事实上，没什么。”上校吞吞吐吐地说，“你是说，什么都行？”
    “不错，不错。说下去。”
    “哦，没什么。小事一桩。我回房的时候注意到我的隔壁，也就是那边包房的门──这你是知道的。”
    “是的，十六号。”
    “那门关得不严。里面那个人鬼鬼崇崇往外瞧。然后急忙关上门。当然，这没什么──不过，总有点叫人奇怪。我是说，要是你想看什么，通常总是把门一开，头往外一伸。可他那鬼鬼崇崇的样子引起我的注意。”
    “是──呀──”波洛含糊其辞。
    “我不是说过吗，这没什么。”阿巴思诺特上校表示歉意，“可是你知道，那个时候──大清早──四周静悄悄的──这家伙鬼头鬼脑──跟侦探小说所写的那样──我说的都是废话。”
    他立起身来。
    “要是你再没有──”
    “谢谢，阿巴思诺特上校。没事了。”
    这位军人迟疑了一会儿。他起初的那种受处国人盘问所引起的厌恶感此刻消尽了。
    “至于德贝汉小姐，”他为难地说，“你可以相信我，她是清白的，她是个地道的绅士。”
    他红着脸走了。
    “‘地道的绅士’是什么意思？”康斯坦丁大夫很有兴趣地问。
    “意思是德贝汉小姐的父亲和兄弟跟阿巴思诺特上校属同一学派。”波洛说。
    “啊！”康斯坦丁大夫失望地说，“这跟案件毫不相干。”
    “对极了。”波洛说。
    他在沉思默想。手指轻轻敲打着桌子，然后又抬头来。
    “阿巴思诺特上校吸烟斗的。”他说，“在雷切特包房里我捡到一根的通条。雷切特只吸雪茄。”
    “你以为……？”
    “他是唯一承认抽烟斗的人。他也听过阿姆斯特朗上校──也许他真的认识他，只是不承认。”
    “所以你以为他可能──？”
    波洛急促摇了摇头。
    “这是──这是不可能的，完全不可能。这么一个可尊敬的、傻乎乎的、耿直的英国人能在一个人身戳上十二刀吗？朋友，你觉得，这是不可能的吗？”
    “人人都要尊重心理学──案子有一个症候，不过不是阿巴思诺特上校的。还是见见下一位吧。”
    这次，鲍克先生不再提意大利人了，不过心里还想着他。
9 THE EVIDENCE OF MR. HARDMAN
9 THE EVIDENCE OF MR. HARDMAN
The last of the first-class passengers to be interviewed, Mr. Hardman, was the big flamboyant American who had shared a table with the Italian and the valet.
He wore a somewhat loud check suit, a pink shirt, and a flashy tie-pin, and was rolling something round his tongue as he entered the dining-car. He had a big, fleshy, coarse-featured face, with a good-humoured expression.
“Morning, gentlemen,” he said. “What can I do for you?”
“You have heard of this murder, Mr.—er—Hardman?”
“Sure.” He shifted the chewing gum deftly.
“We are of necessity interviewing all the passengers on the train.”
“That’s all right by me. Guess that’s the only way to tackle the job.”
Poirot consulted the passport lying in front of him.
“You are Cyrus Bethman Hardman, United States subject, forty-one years of age, travelling salesman for typewriting ribbons?”
“O.K. That’s me.”
you are travelling from Stamboul to Paris?”
“That’s so.”
“Reason?”
“Business.”
“Do you always travel first-class, Mr. Hardman?”
“Yes, sir. The firm pays my travelling expenses. “ He winked.
“Now, Mr. Hardman, we come to the events of last night.”
The American nodded.
“What can you tell us about the matter?”
“Exactly nothing at all.”
“Ah, that is a pity. Perhaps, Mr. Hardman, you will tell us exactly what you did last night from dinner onwards?”
For the first time the American did not seem ready with his reply. At last he said: “Excuse me, gentlemen, but just who are you? Put me wise.”
“This is M. Bouc, a director of the Compagnie des Wagons Lits. This gentleman is the doctor who examined the body.”
“And you yourself?”
“I am Hercule Poirot. I am engaged by the company to investigate this matter.”
“I’ve heard of you,” said Mr. Hardman. He reflected a minute or two longer. “Guess I’d better come clean.”
“It will certainly be advisable for you to tell us all you know,” said Poirot drily.
“You’d have said a mouthful if there was anything I did know. But I don’t. I know nothing at all—just as I said. But I ought to know something. That’s what makes me sore. I ought to.”
“Please explain, Mr. Hardman.”
Mr. Hardman sighed, removed the chewing gum, and dived into a pocket. At the same time his whole personality seemed to undergo a change. He became less of a stage character and more of a real person. The resonant nasal tones of his voice became modified.
“That passport’s a bit of bluff,” he said. “That’s who I really am.”
Poirot scrutinised the card flipped across to him. M. Bouc peered over his shoulder.
Poirot knew the name as that of one of the best-known and most reputable private detective agencies in New York.
“Now, Mr. Hardman,” he said, “let us hear the meaning of this.”
“Sure. Things came about this way. I’d come over to Europe trailing a couple of crooks—nothing to do with this business. The chase ended in Stamboul. I wired the Chief and got his instructions to return, and I would have been making my tracks back to little old New York when I got this.”
He pushed across a letter.
THE TOKATLLAN HOTEL
Dear Sir:
You have been pointed out to me as an operative of the McNeil Detective Agency. Kindly report at my suite at four o’clock this afternoon.
S. E. RATCHETT
“Eh bien?”
“I reported at the time stated, and Mr. Ratchett put me wise to the situation. He showed me a couple of letters he’d got.”
“He was alarmed?”
“Pretended not to be, but he was rattled, all right. He put up a proposition to me. I was to travel by the same train as he did to Parrus and see that nobody got him. Well, gentlemen, I did travel by the same train, and in spite of me, somebody did get him. I certainly feel sore about it. It doesn’t look any too good for me.”
“Did he give you any indication of the line you were to take?”
“Sure. He had it all taped out. It was his idea that I should travel in the compartment alongside his. Well, that blew up right at the start. The only place I could get was berth No. 16, and I had a job getting that. I guess the conductor likes to keep that compartment up his sleeve. But that’s neither here nor there. When I looked all round the situation, it seemed to me that No. 16 was a pretty good strategic position. There was only the dining-car in front of the Stamboul sleeping-car, and the door onto the platform at the front end was barred at night. The only way a thug could come was through the rear-end door to the platform, or along the train from the rear, and in either case he’d have to pass right by my compartment.”
“You had no idea, I suppose, of the identity of the possible assailant?”
“Well, I knew what he looked like. Mr. Ratchett described him to me.”
“What?”
All three men leaned forward eagerly.
Hardman went on.
“A small man—dark—with a womanish kind of voice. That’s what the old man said. Said, too, that he didn’t think it would be the first night out, More likely the second or third.”
“He knew something,” said M. Bouc.
“He certainly knew more than he told his secretary,” commented Poirot thoughtfully. “Did he tell you anything about this enemy of his? Did he, for instance, say why his life was threatened?”
“No, he was kinda reticent about that part of it. just said the fellow-was out for his blood and meant to get it.”
“A small man—dark—with a womanish voice,” repeated Poirot thoughtfully. Then, fixing a sharp glance on Hardman, he asked: “You knew who he really was, of course?”
“Which, Mister?”
“Ratchett. You recognised him?”
“I don’t get you.”
“Ratchett was Cassetti, the Armstrong murderer.”
Mr. Hardman gave vent to a prolonged whistle.
“That certainly is some surprise!” he said. “Yes, sir! No, I didn’t recognise him. I was away out West when that case came on. I suppose I saw photos of him in the papers, but I wouldn’t recognise my own mother when a newspaper photographer got through with her. Well, I don’t doubt that a few people had it in for Cassetti all right.”
Do you know of anyone connected with the Armstrong case who answers to that description: small—dark—womanish voice?”
Hardman reflected a minute or two. “It’s hard to say. Pretty nearly everyone connected with that case is dead.”
“There was the girl who threw herself out of the window, remember.”
“Sure. That’s a good point, that. She was a foreigner of some kind. Maybe she had some Wop relations. But you’ve got to remember that there were other cases besides the Armstrong one. Cassetti had been running this kidnapping stunt for some time. You can’t concentrate on that only.”
Ah, but we have reason to believe that this crime is connected with the Armstrong case.”
Mr. Hardman cocked an inquiring eye. Poirot did not respond. The American shook his head.
“I can’t call to mind anybody answering that description in the Armstrong case,” he said slowly. “But of course I wasn’t in it and didn’t know much about it.”
“Well, continue your narrative, Mr. Hardman.”
“There’s very little to tell. I got my sleep in the daytime and stayed awake on the watch at night. Nothing suspicious happened the first night. Last night was the same, as far as I was concerned. I had my door a little ajar and watched. No stranger passed.”
“You are sure of that, Mr. Hardman?”
“I’m plumb certain. Nobody got on that train from outside, and nobody came along the train from the rear carriages. I’ll take my oath on that.”
“Could you see the conductor from your position?”
“Sure. He sits on that little seat almost flush with my door.”
“Did he leave that seat at all after the train stopped at Vincovci?”
“That was the last station? Why, yes, he answered a couple of bells—that would be just after the train came to a halt for good. Then, after that, he went past me into the rear coach—was there about a quarter of an hour. There was a bell ringing like mad and he came back running. I stepped out into the corridor to see what it was all about—felt a mite nervous, you understand—but it was only the American dame. She was raising hell about something or other, I grinned. Then he went on to another compartment and came back and got a bottle of mineral water for someone. After that he settled down in his seat till he went up to the far end to make somebody’s bed up. I don’t think he stirred after that until about five o’clock this morning.”
“Did he doze off at all?”
“That I can’t say. He may have.”
Poirot nodded. Automatically his hands straightened the papers on the table. He picked up the official card once more.
“Be so good as just to initial this,” he said.
The other complied.
“There is no one, I suppose, who can confirm your story of your identity, Mr. Hardman?”
“On this train? Well, not exactly. Unless it might be young MacQueen. I know him well enough—I’ve seen him in his father’s office in New York. But that’s not to say he’ll remember me from a crowd of other operatives. No, Mr. Poirot, you’ll have to wait and cable New York when the snow lets up. But it’s O.K. I’m not telling the tale. Well, so long, gentlemen. Pleased to have met you, Mr. Poirot.”
Poirot proffered his cigarette case. “But perhaps you prefer a pipe?”
“Not me.” He helped himself, then strode briskly off.
The three men looked at each other.
“You think he is genuine?” asked Dr. Constantine.
“Yes, yes. I know the type. Besides, it is a story that would be very easy to disprove.”
“He has given us a piece of very interesting evidence,” said M. Bouc.
“Yes, indeed.”
“A small man—dark—with a high-pitched voice,” said M. Bouc thoughtfully.
“A description which applies to no one on the train,” said Poirot.
第九章　哈特曼先生的证词
第九章　哈特曼先生的证词    
    头等包房乘客中最后一个要见的是哈特曼先生。他是个身材高大、红头发的美国人。他经常跟意大利人和男佣人同桌吃饭。
    他穿一身花哨的格子外套，粉红衬衫。领带上的别针特别耀眼。他跨进餐车时，嘴里正嚼着什么东西。他那多肉的宽脸膛显得一副粗俗相。他说起话来富有幽默感。
    “早安，先生们。”他说，“有何见教？”
    “听说杀人案了吧，哈特曼先生？”
    “听说过。”
    他熟练地用舌头挪了挪嘴里的口香糖。
    “我们觉得有必要会会车里的全体旅客。”
    “我没问题，办这种事少不了这一手。”
    波洛查阅了一下摆在他面前的护照。
    “你是赛勒斯•白思曼•哈特曼，美国人，四十一岁，打字机带的流动推销员，是不是？”
    “不错，正是敝人。”
    “你是从伊斯埕布尔去巴黎的？”
    “说对了。”
    “有何贵干？”
    “做买卖。”
    “你常坐头等车吗，哈特曼先生？”
    “是的，先生．旅费，公司会开销的。”
    他眨了眨眼。
    “哈特曼先生，让我们谈谈昨晚的案件吧。”
    美国人点了点头。
    “关于这个案子你能说些什么？”
    “确切地说，一无所知。”
    “哦，太遗憾了。哈特曼先生，也许你能告诉我们昨天晚饭后你在做些什么？”
    看来，这还是这位美国人第一次一时想不出如何回答，但是他还是开口了：
    “请原谅，先生们，请问诸位是谁？好让我有个底。”
    “这位是鲍克先生，国际客车公司董事，这伞是验尸的大夫。”
    “你呢？”
    “赫卡尔•波洛。受公司委托，经办这宗案子。”
    “久仰，久仰。”哈特曼先生思索了一两分钟后说，“想来还是把底亮来的出为好。”
    “你能把自己所知道的都跟我们说，那自然是可取的。”波洛干巴巴地说。
    “刚才你向我了解些事，可我一无所知──我已经说过。但是，我应该知道点什么。这正是使我难受的事。我是应该知道些什么的。”
    “哈特曼先生，请解释一下。”
    哈特曼叹一口气，吐出口香粮，手伸进口袋。这时，他整个好象换了个人似的。他不再是戏剧中的角色。而是一个现实中的人。他那又浓又重的鼻音少多了。
    “那份护照有点掺假。”他说。“瞧这，你就明白我是谁。”
    波洛仔细看着他抛过来的名片，鲍克先生也赶紧伸过脑袋去看──纽约麦克奈尔侦探办事处赛勒斯•Ｂ•哈特曼先生波洛熟悉这个名字。这是一家久负盛名的私人侦探机构。
    “那么，哈特曼先生，”他说，“让我们听听，这张名片的真正含义吧。”
    “好吧。事情是这样的。我来欧洲办几桩案子──跟这桩毫不相干，到了伊斯坦布尔，断线了，我就打电报给头儿。上边指示我回去。要不是接到这玩意儿，我早就回纽约老家去了。”
    他递过去一封信。
    上头印着：托凯琳旅馆
    尊敬的先生：
    据悉你是麦克奈尔侦探办事处的私人保镖，请于今天下午四时来我包房一谈。
    信的署名是：Ｓ•Ｅ•雷切特
    “是么？”
    “我在约定的时间前去会见雷切特先生。他把自己的处境给我说了，还让我看了好几封他收到的信。”
    “他神情慌乱吗？”
    “装得挺镇静。但整个晚上丧魂落魄的。他给我提了个建议，让我跟他坐同一趟火车，护养他到珀罗斯，以免受人暗害，于是，先生们，我就这样上了火车。可是，有了我，他还是让人杀了。这太使人痛心，对我毕竟太糟了。”
    “秋用什么手段他有没有给你什么指示？”
    “那当然。事事他都安排妥了。全是他出的主意。他让我住在他近旁的包房里──可是，临了，全吹了。我只能购得十六号铺。还是费了不少劲哩。据我推测，这个铺位，列车员有他自己的小算盘。可是，还是捡重要的来说吧，我观察四周的环境，心想，这个十六号铺倒是个挺理想的战略要地哩。伊斯坦布尔卧车前头只有餐车。上下车的前门夜里是闩着的。刺客唯一能过来的门只有后门。要么只能从我们后面的车厢沿过道进来──无论他怎么来，都不得不经过我的房门。”
    “我想，你对可能出现的刺客的特征不会有底吧？”
    “不，刺客的模样我倒还有点数呢。雷切特跟我讲过。”
    “什么？”
    三个人全都把身子往前凑过去。
    哈特曼接着说：
    “小个儿，黑脸膛，说话象女人。这就是老头告诉我的。他还说，他认为第一夜刺客不会来，很可能是第二夜或第三夜。”
    “他自己心中倒有底哩。”鲍克先生说。
    “他自然不会把全部底细都倒给秘书。”波洛若有所思地说，“有关他的仇敌他还跟你说些什么？比如说，为什么他的生命会受到威胁？”
    “没有，这个人对这种事一个字没提。只是说，那个人来要他的命并一定要拿到手的。”
    “小个儿，黑脸膛，说话象女人。”波洛沉思地说。
    然后他那锐利的目光盯着哈特曼说：“你知道，他到底是谁？”
    “谁，先生？”
    “雷切特，你认出了他没有？”
    “我不明白你的意思。”
    “雷切特就是凯赛梯，杀害阿姆斯特朗的凶手。”
    哈特曼先生口里发出长长的口哨声。
    “这可太出乎意外了。”他说，“可不是吗，先生！不，我不认识他。这案件发生的时候，我在西部，也许象在报上见过他的照片。可只要是报上登的照片，哪怕是我的亲娘，我也认不出是谁。不可否订，不少人对凯赛梯是切齿痛恨的。”
    “你可知道，跟阿姆斯特朗来往的人中，有谁长得跟你所说的一样──小个儿，黑脸膛，说话象女人？”
    哈特曼思索了片刻。
    “这就难说了。跟这案件有关的人几乎全死了。”
    “还记得那跳窗自杀的女孩子吗？”
    “记得。你可说到点子上去了。她是个外国人，也许她有几个南欧来的亲戚，不过，别忘了，除了阿姆斯特朗这一案子外，还有其他一此案子呢。凯赛梯干拐骗勾当可是有些时候了。你不能只注意这一件案子。”
    “唔，可是我们有理由相信，这起谋杀案跟阿姆斯特朗案有关。”
    哈特曼投过探问的目光，波洛毫无反应。美国人摇了摇头。
    “我想不起有谁的模样长得跟阿姆斯特朗案中的什么人一样。”他说得很慢，“当然，我没有插手这案子，也不很了解。”
    “哈特曼先生，往下说吧。”
    “还有点小事要说。我在白天睡觉，夜里守护。第一夜没什么可疑的，昨晚除了我已提过的，没别的可疑的。我把门打开一点儿注视着。并没有陌生人走过。”
    “有把握吗，哈特曼先生？”
    “绝对有把握。没有外人来过，也没有人从隔壁车厢过来。我可以发誓。”
    “从你那里能看得到列车员吗？”
    “看得到。借着我房里射出的灯光，看见他坐在自己的座位上，脸上一闪一闪的。”
    “车在文科夫戚停靠时，他离开过座位吗？”
    “是上一个站吗？可不是，响了二次铃声，他去了──很可能是火车站在这儿停下来以后的事──后来，他从我门前经过，到隔壁车厢去了──这时是一点上刻左右铃响了，他发疯似地跑回来了。我到过道看看，究竟出了什么事──你可明白，怪可怕的──可是，只是那个美国老太太，她不知为什么在大吵大闹，叫人好笑。后来他到另一个包房去，出来后拿了一瓶矿泉水送给谁，此后他一直坐在座位上，直到车厢那一头有人唤他去铺床，他才离开。再后来，我想直到早晨五点前他没走开过。”
    “他没打过瞌睡？”
    “这我可说不上，也许有过。”
    波洛点点头，机械地伸手拿桌上的材料。他又一次拿起名片。
    “费心签个字。”
    对方一一照办。
    “我想，没有谁能证实你所说的话吧，哈特曼先生？”
    “车上？不会有。麦克此先生也许能。我熟悉他──在纽约他父亲事务所里见到过他──这倒不是说他能从一大堆侦探中认得出我来。不，波洛先生，你最好是等会儿排除雪堆之后，给纽约拍个电报。就这么着。我可不是瞎说一气。再见了，诸位先生。波洛先生，见到你很高兴。”
    波洛把烟盒递过去。
    “也许你喜欢抽烟斗吧？”
    “我不用烟斗。”
    他拿了一支烟，抽起来，然后轻快地走了出去。
    三个人面面相觑。
    “你觉得他说的话可靠吗？”康斯坦丁大夫问。
    “是的，是的，我了解这类人。再说，他编的那套故事一戳就穿。”
    “他供出了非常有趣的证据。”鲍克先生说。
    “那自然。”
    “小个儿，黑脸膛，尖细的声音。”鲍克先生沉思道。
    “他所形容的人车上没一个对得上号。”波洛说。
10 THE EVIDENCE OF THE ITALIAN
10 THE EVIDENCE OF THE ITALIAN
“And now,” said Poirot with a twinkle in his eye, “we will delight the heart of M. Bouc and see the Italian.”
Antonio Foscarelli came into the dining-car with a swift, cat-like tread. His face beamed. It was a typical Italian face, sunny-looking and swarthy.
He spoke French well and fluently with only a slight accent.
“Your name is Antonio Foscarelli?”
“Yes, Monsieur.”
“You are, I see, a naturalised American subject?”
The American grinned. “Yes, Monsieur. It is better for my business.”
“You are an agent for Ford motor cars?”
“Yes, you see—”
A voluble exposition followed. At the end of it anything that the three men did not know about Foscarelli’s business methods, his journeys, his income, and his opinion of the United States and most European countries seemed a negligible factor. This was not a man who had to have information dragged from him. It gushed out.
His good-natured, childish face beamed with satisfaction as, with a last eloquent gesture, he paused and wiped his forehead with a handkerchief.
“So you see,” he said. “I do big business. I am up to date. I understand salesmanship!”
“You have been in the United States, then, for the last ten years on and off.”
Yes, Monsieur. Ah! well do I remember the day I first took the boat—to go to America, so far away! My mother, my little sister—”
Poirot cut short the flood of reminiscence.
“During your sojourn in the United States, did you ever come across the deceased?”
“Never. But I know the type. Oh! yes.” He snapped his fingers expressively. “It is very respectable, very well-dressed, but underneath it is all wrong. Out of my experience I should say he was the big crook. I give you my opinion for what it is worth.”
“Your opinion is quite right,” said Poirot drily. “Ratchett was Cassetti, the kidnapper.”
“What did I tell you? I have learned to be very acute—to read the face. It is necessary. Only in America do they teach you the proper way to sell. I—”
“You remember the Armstrong case?”
“I do not quite remember. The name, yes? It was a little girl, a baby, was it not?”
“Yes, a very tragic affair.”
The Italian seemed the first person to demur to this view.
“Ah! well, these things they happen,” he said philosophically, “in a great civilisation such as America—”
Poirot cut him short. “Did you ever come across any members of the Armstrong family?”
“No, I do not think so. It is difficult to say. I will give you some figures. Last year alone, I sold—”
“Monsieur, pray confine yourself to the point.”
The Italian’s hands flung themselves out in a gesture of apology. “A thousand pardons.”
“Tell me, if you please, your exact movements last night from dinner onwards.”
“With pleasure. I stay here as long as I can. It is more amusing. I talk to the American gentleman at my table. He sells typewriter ribbons. Then I go back to my compartment. It is empty. The miserable John Bull who shares it with me is away attending to his master. At last he comes back—very long face as usual. He will not talk—says yes and no. A miserable race, the English—not sympathetic. He sits in the corner, very stiff, reading a book, Then the conductor comes and makes our beds.”
“Nos. 4 and 5,” murmured Poirot.
“Exactly—the end compartment. Mine is the upper berth. I get up there. I smoke and read. The little Englishman has, I think, the toothache. He gets out a little bottle of stuff that smells very strong. He lies in bed and groans. Presently I sleep. Whenever I wake I hear him groaning.”
“Do you know if he left the carriage at all during the night?”
“I do not think so. That, I should hear. The light from the corridor—one wakes up automatically thinking it is the customs examination at some frontier.”
“Did he ever speak of his master? Ever express any animus against him?”
“I tell you he did not speak. He was not sympathetic. A fish.”
“You smoke, you say—a pipe, cigarettes, cigar?”
“Cigarettes only.”
Poirot proffered one, which he accepted.
“Have you ever been to Chicago?” inquired M. Bouc.
“Oh! yes—a fine city—but I know best New York, Cleveland, Detroit. You have been to the States? No? You should go. It—”
Poirot pushed a sheet of paper across to him.
“If you will sign this, and put your permanent address, please.”
The Italian wrote with a flourish. Then he rose, his smile as engaging as ever.
“That is all? You do not require me further? Good day to you, Messieurs. I wish we could get out of the snow. I have an appointment in Milan.” He shook his head sadly. “I shall lose the business.” He departed.
Poirot looked at his friend.
“He has been a long time in America,” said M. Bouc, “and he is an Italian, and Italians use the knife! And they are great liars! I do not like Italians.”
“?a se voit,” said Poirot with a smile “Well, it may be that you are right, but I will point out to you, my friend, that there is absolutely no evidence against the man.”
“And what about the psychology? Do not Italians stab?”
“Assuredly,” said Poirot. “Especially in the heat of a quarrel. But this—this is a different kind of crime. I have the little idea, my friend, that this is a crime very carefully planned and staged. It is a far-sighted, long-headed crime. it is not—how shall I express it?—a Latin crime. It is a crime that shows traces of a cool, resourceful, deliberate brain—I think an Anglo-Saxon brain—”
He picked up the last two passports.
“Let us now,” he said, “see Miss Mary Debenham.”
第十章　意大利人的证词
第十章　意大利人的证词             
    “现在我们应该满足鲍克先生的愿望了，”波洛眨了眨眼，说。“该会会意大利人。”
    安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里，象只猫，快步跨进餐车。他容光焕发，热情爽快，黑黝黝的，一副典型的意大利人的面孔。
    他说一口漂亮而流利的法语，只是稍带点儿意大利音。
    “你的姓名是安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “我想，你已入了美国籍，是吗？”
    他咧开嘴笑了起来。
    “是的，先生，这对我的买卖更方便些。”
    “你是福特汽车公司的代办？”
    “是的，是这么一回事──”
    接着，他滔滔不绝作了大推自我介绍。但到头来，听的人对福斯卡拉里的买卖方式，他的旅行，他的收入，他对美国及欧洲大多数国家所抱的观点，竟茫然无知。充其量，他不过是个微不足道的小代理商而已。他不是那种说话吞吞吐吐的人。他不说则已，一说就是滔滔不绝，洋洋洒洒。
    他一停嘴，便以一种最时髦，最富有表情的手势，用手帕抹抹前额。这时，他那稚气的，好性子的脸便显得踌躇满志，容光焕发。
    “所以，你瞧，”他说，“我干的是个大买卖。我是个入时的人，懂得生财之道。”
    “看来，近十年来你先后几次去过美国吧？”
    “是的，先生。啊，第一次坐般去美国的情景至今历历在目。好远的地方！我妈，我妹子……”
    波洛打断他那没完没了的回忆。
    “在你旅居美国期间，可曾遇见过被害者？”
    “没有，不过我了解这种人。是的，是的。”他富有表情地把手指弄得格格作响。“看来，他挺体面，穿得漂漂亮亮，可背地里尽干些伤天害理的勾当。据我的经验，他必定是个大骗子。我的意见是值得一听的。”
    “你的意见很好。”波洛干巴巴地说。“雷切特就是凯赛梯，是个拐骗犯。”
    “我说什么来着？我可学会了看相，一看就中，这是一种必不可少的本领。只有在美国，他们才教会你做买卖的窍门。”
    “你可记得阿姆斯特朗拐骗案？”
    “记不得了。叫什么名字？一个小姑娘──小妹妹──是不是？”
    “是的，一件大惨案。”
    看来，这个意大利人还是第一个对一观点持不同看法的人。
    “唔，这类事嘛，”他的话富有哲理。“在美国这样伟大文明的国家里……”
    波波没让他把话说完。
    “你可认识阿姆斯特朗家的什么人？”
    “不认识，我想，不会认识的。不过也很难说，让我给你说些数字。单是去年一年我就卖了……”
    “先生，请别离题。”
    意大利人挥挥手，表示歉意。
    “多原谅，多原谅。”
    “愿意的话，请确切告诉我，昨天晚饭后你的活动。”
    “当然愿意。我一直呆在这儿，这儿更好玩些，我在自己的饭桌上跟一位美国先生聊天，做的是打字带买卖。然后我回到我自己的房里去，房里没人，跟我同住的，可怜的英国佬伺候他的主人去了。后来，他回来了──跟往常一样，绷着脸，满肚子不高兴。闭着嘴一声不吭。英国人，是个可怜的民族──得不到别人的同情。他坐在角落里，绷着脸看书。后来，列车员为我们铺床。”
    “四号铺和五号铺。”波洛自言自语。
    “对极了──最末一个包房，我在上铺。我坐起来，抽会儿烟，看点书。那个小英国佬，我想，怕是牙痛，他掏出一小瓶气味挺浓的玩意儿，躺下去直哼哼。过了一会儿，我睡着了。后来又醒过来，还听见他在哼哼唧唧。”
    “你可记得夜里他离开过包房没有？”
    “我想，没离开过。要不，我会听见的。要是你一醒过来，见了过道上的灯光，准以为是在国境线上，海关在检查哩。”
    “他没说起过自己的主人？有没有流露出对主人的怨恨？”
    “我不是说过吗，他这人从来一声不吭，一点也不讨人喜欢，像根木头。”
    “你说，你抽烟──抽烟斗，还是纸烟或是雪茄？”
    “只抽纸烟。”
    波洛递给他一支纸烟，他接了过去。
    “你在芝加哥呆过？”鲍克先生问。
    “唔，呆过──挺不错的城市──不过，我最熟悉的要数纽约、华盛顿、底特律。这些地方你可去过？没有？值得去，那……”
    波洛推过去一张纸。
    “愿意的话，请写下你的姓名及永久地址。”
    意大利人笔一毂就写起来，写完后，立起身──他的笑脸还是那么迷人。
    “没事了？不再问些什么了？再见，先生们。但愿我们能摆脱这场雪。我在米兰还有约会哩。”他痛苦地摇摇头，“不然的话，我要错过这笔买卖了。”
    他走了。
    波洛看看他的朋友。
    “他在美国呆了好久，”鲍克先生说，“又是意大利人，意大利人爱用刀子！况且个个都是大骗子，我就是不喜欢意大利人。”
    “看来，”波洛笑着说，“也许你是对的，不过，朋友，我要指出，我们手头还没有对他不利的证据呢。”
    “那么心理因素呢？意大利人不爱动刀子？”
    “毫无疑问，“波洛说，”尤其在吵得不可开交的时候。可是这──这是另一类的杀人案。朋友，我有个小小的想法。这一杀人案是以过仔细筹划安排的，这个想得很深，很精明的谋杀案。这不是──怎么说呢？──拉丁式的杀人案，而是处处显得冷静沉着，深谋远虑，是审慎的头脑的产特──我以为是盎格鲁撒克逊（英国人）人的头脑。”
    他拿起最后两份护照。
    “我们这就会会玛丽•德贝汉小姐。”他说。
11 THE EVIDENCE OF MISS DEBENHAM
11 THE EVIDENCE OF MISS DEBENHAM
When Mary Debenham entered the dining-car she confirmed Poirot’s previous estimate of her. She was very neatly dressed in a little black suit with a French grey shirt, and the smooth waves of her dark head were neat and unruffled. Her manner was as calm and unruffled as her hair.
She sat down opposite Poirot and M. Bouc and looked at them inquiringly.
“Your name is Mary Hermione Debenham and you are twenty-six years of age?” began Poirot.
“Yes.”
“English?”
“Yes.”
“Will you be so kind, Mademoiselle, as to write down your permanent address on this piece of paper?”
She complied. Her writing was clear and legible.
“And now, Mademoiselle, what have you to tell us of the affair last night?”
“I am afraid I have nothing to tell you. I went to bed and slept.”
“Does it distress you very much, Mademoiselle, that a crime has been committed on this train?”
The question was clearly unexpected. Her grey eyes widened a little.
“I don’t quite understand you?”
“It was a perfectly simple question that I asked you, Mademoiselle. I will repeat it. Are you very much distressed that a crime should have been committed on this train?”
“I have not really thought about it from that point of view. No, I cannot say that I am at all distressed.”
“A crime—it is all in the day’s work to you, eh?”
“It is naturally an unpleasant thing to have happen,” said Mary Debenham quietly.
“You are very Anglo-Saxon, Mademoiselle. Vous n’éprouvez pas d’émotion.”
She smiled a little. “I am afraid I cannot have hysterics to prove my sensibility. After all, people die every day.”
“They die, yes. But murder is a little more rare.”
“Oh! certainly.”
“You were not acquainted with the dead man?”
“I saw him for the first time when lunching here yesterday.”
“And how did he strike you?”
“I hardly noticed him.”
“He did not impress you as an evil personality?”
She shrugged her shoulders slightly. “Really, I cannot say I thought about it.”
Poirot looked at her keenly.
“You are, I think, a little bit contemptuous of the way I prosecute my inquiries,” he said with a twinkle. “Not so, you think, would an English inquiry be conducted. There everything would be cut and dried—it would be all kept to the facts—a well-ordered business. But I, Mademoiselle, have my little originalities. I look first at my witness, I sum up his or her character, and I frame my questions accordingly. just a little minute ago I am asking questions of a gentleman who wants to tell me all his ideas on every subject. Well, him I keep strictly to the point. I want him to answer yes or no. This or that. And then you come. I see at once that you will be orderly and methodical. You will confine yourself to the matter in hand. Your answers will be brief and to the point. And because, Mademoiselle, human nature is perverse, I ask of you quite different questions. I ask what you feel, what you think. It does not please you, this method?”
“If you will forgive my saying so, it seems somewhat of a waste of time. Whether or not I liked Mr. Ratchett’s face does not seem likely to be helpful in finding out who killed him.”
“Do you know who the man Ratchett really was, Mademoiselle?”
She nodded. “Mrs. Hubbard has been telling everyone.”
“And what do you think of the Armstrong affair?”
“It was quite abominable,” said the girl crisply.
Poirot looked at her thoughtfully.
“You are travelling from Baghdad, I believe, Miss Debenham?”
“Yes.”
“To London?”
“Yes.”
“What have you been doing in Baghdad?”
“I have been acting as governess to two children.”
“Are you returning to your post after your holiday?”
“I am not sure.”
“Why is that?”
“Baghdad is rather out of things. I think I should prefer a post in London if I can hear of a suitable one.”
“I see. I thought, perhaps, you might be going to be married.”
Miss Debenham did not reply. She raised her eyes and looked Poirot full in the face. The glance said plainly: “You are impertinent.”
“What is your opinion of the lady who shares your compartment—Miss Ohlsson?”
“She seems a pleasant, simple creature.”
“What colour is her dressing-gown?”
Mary Debenham stared. “A kind of brownish colour—natural wool.”
“Ah! I may mention without indiscretion, I hope, that I noticed the colour of your dressing-gown on the way from Aleppo to Stamboul. A pale mauve, I believe.”
“Yes, that is right.”
“Have you any other dressing-gown, Mademoiselle? A scarlet dressing-gown, for example?”
“No, that is not mine.”
Poirot leant forward. He was like a cat pouncing on a mouse.
“Whose, then?’
The girl drew back a little, startled. “I don’t know. What do you mean?”
“You do not say, ‘No, I have no such thing.’ You say, ‘That is not mine.’ Meaning that such a thing does belong to someone else.”
She nodded.
“Somebody else on this train?”
‘Yes.”
“Whose is it?”
“I told you just now: I don’t know. I woke up this morning about five o’clock with the feeling that the train had been standing still for a long time. I opened the door and looked out into the corridor, thinking we might be at a station. I saw someone in a scarlet kimono some way down the corridor.”
“And you don’t know who it was? Was she fair, or dark, or grey-haired?”
“I can’t say. She had on a shingle cap and I only saw the back of her head.”
“And in build?”
“Tallish and slim, I should judge, but it’s difficult to say. The kimono was embroidered with dragons.”
“Yes, yes, that is right—dragons.” He was silent a minute. He murmured to himself. “I cannot understand. I cannot understand. None of this makes sense.”
Then, looking up, he said: “I need not keep you further, Mademoiselle.”
“Oh!” She seemed rather taken aback but rose promptly.
In the doorway, however, she hesitated a minute and then came back.
“The Swedish lady—Miss Ohlsson, is it?—seems rather worried. She says you told her she was the last person to see this man alive. She thinks, I believe, that you suspect her on that account. Can’t I tell her that she has made a mistake? Really, you know, she is the kind of creature who wouldn’t hurt a fly.” She smiled a little as she spoke.
“What time was it that she went to fetch the aspirin from Mrs. Hubbard?”
“Just after half-past ten.”
“She was away—how long?”
“About five minutes.”
“Did she leave the compartment again during the night?”
“No.”
Poirot turned to the doctor. “Could Ratchett have been killed as early as that?”
The doctor shook his head.
“Then I think you can reassure your friend, Mademoiselle.”
“Thank you.” She smiled suddenly at him, a smile that invited sympathy. “She’s like a sheep, you know. She gets anxious and bleats.”
She turned and went out.
第十一章　德贝汉小姐的证词
第十一章　德贝汉小姐的证词         
    德贝汉小姐踏进餐车，一眼就可以看出，波洛对自己的看法没有改变。她整整齐齐，穿一件浅黑色的外套，配一件法国式的灰衬衫，头上头黑、光滑的卷发梳理得齐齐整整，没一根散乱。她态度冷静沉着，跟自己的头发一样，处事有条不紊。
    她在波洛和鲍克先生的对面坐下来，投以询问的目光。
    “你的姓名是玛丽•赫米翁•德贝汉。现年二十六岁。是吗？”波洛先开口。
    “不错。”
    “英国人？”
    “是的。”
    “小姐，费心在这张纸上写下你的永久通讯处，行不行？”
    她一一照办。
    她的字迹清晰，工整。
    “小姐，你对昨晚的案子有什么要说的？”
    “我想，没什么可说。我睡了。”
    “小姐，这趟车上发生了一起人命案，你难过吗？”
    这问题提得着实意外，她的一双灰眼睛不禁略微张大了些。
    “我实在不明白你的意思。”
    “小姐，我要问的是个非常简单的问题，我重复一遍，这趟车上发生了一起人命案，你难过吗？”
    “我不曾想过。不，谈不上难过。”
    “谋杀案──你对谋杀案习以为常，是吗？”
    “发生这种事，不用说，是不会使人愉快的。”玛丽•德贝汉小姐平静的说。
    “你果真是个典型的盎格鲁撒克逊人，小姐。你的感情感不流露。”
    她微微一笑。
    我想，我的神经很健全，用不着检验自己的感受。反正，每天都有人死的。”
    “不错，有人死。不过，谋杀案并不多。”
    “唔，那自然。”
    “你认不认识死者？”
    “我第一次见到他，是在昨天晚饭时，在这个地方。”
    “他留给你的印象很深吧？”
    “我没注意他。”
    “在你的印象中，他是不是个很坏的人？”
    她又略略耸耸肩。
    “说实在的，我不曾想过。”
    波洛那锐利的目光刺了她一下。
    “想来你对我这种询问方法很不以为然，”他眨眨眼，说道，“你原来想的不是这种，而是英国式的。凡事都该准备停当──摆出事实，按部就班。可是小姐，我这人倒有点儿与众不同。首先我得见见证人，摸清他或她的脾性，然后再相应地提出问题来。刚刚我对一位先生提过问题，他愿意把他对这一案件的想法全盘告诉我。我的问题就是严格地围绕这一中心提出的。要他回答也仅仅是‘是’或‘否’，‘这’或‘那’。后来，你来了，一眼就看出，你这人办事有条有理，说话不会东拉西扯，你的回答必然是简短，但切中要害的。小姐，正加为人的本性难移，我要向你提各种问题，而你要回答的是此刻你有什么感觉，过去有什么想法？这个问题不会使你生气吧？”
    “要是你原谅我这么说话，看来，不过是有点浪费时间。对雷切特先生的外表我喜欢也罢，厌恶也罢，反正，对弄清楚谁是凶手不会有所帮助。”
    “小姐，你可知道这个雷切特究竟是谁？”
    她点了点头。
    “哈伯德太太跟大家全讲了。”
    “你对阿姆思特朗案件有什么想法？”
    “可恶极了。”这个姑娘回答得很干脆。
    波洛若有所思的打量着她。
    “我想，德贝汉小姐，你是从巴格达来的吧？”
    “是的。”
    “去伦敦？”
    “是的。”
    “你在巴格达一直是做什么的？”
    “两个孩子的家庭教师。”
    “假期结束后你还回到原处？”
    “很难说。”
    “为什么？”
    “巴格达对我是个很不合适的地方。如果有适当的工作我情愿留在伦敦。”
    “这可明白了。我以为也许你快要结婚哩。”
    德贝汉小姐没有回答。她抬起眼睛，紧紧盯着波洛的脸，那眼神清楚表明：
    “你这人说话好没礼貌。”
    “你对与你同一个包房的女士──奥尔逊太太有什么看法？”
    “她似乎很快活，很纯朴。”
    “她的睡衣是什么颜色？”
    玛丽•德贝汉瞪起双眼：
    “浅灰的──纯羊毛的。”
    “啊！恕我说话冒味，我曾看到过你从阿勒颇到伊斯坦布尔的路上穿的睡衣是浅紫红的，我想。”
    “是的，你说的对。”
    “小姐，你还有另外的睡衣？比如说，鲜红色的？”
    “不，那不是我的。”
    波洛俯身向前，好象一只正准备跃出去捕捉老鼠的猫。
    “那么，是谁的？”
    这姑娘惊慌地把身子往后缩了缩。
    “不知道，你这是什么意思？”
    “你没回答‘不，我没有’，而是回答‘这不是我的’──显然这是别的什么人的。”
    她点点头。
    “是车上别的什么人的？”
    “是的。”
    “谁呢？”
    “我已说过，我不知道。今天上午五点钟左右，我醒过来，发觉火车停了好久了，我开了门，朝过道看了看，以为列车可能是停在什么车站上了。我看见有人穿着鲜红的睡衣向过道那头走去。”
    “你知不知道她是谁？她的头发是金黄色的，黑色的还是灰色的？”
    “说不清。她戴着帽，况且我见到的也是背影。”
    “体型呢？”
    “据我判断，高高的，很苗条，不过也很难说。睡衣上绣着龙。”
    “对啦，对啦。你说得很对，是有龙。”
    他沉默了一会，又自言自语起来：“我直不明白，真不明白，这毫无意义。”
    然后，他抬起头，说道：“小姐，不想再麻烦你了。”
    “啊！”她象吃了一惊，但很快地站起身来。
    刚走近门，她迟疑了一会儿又回过身来。
    “那位瑞典太太，奥尔逊女士，是吗？看来，她很不安。据她说，你告诉她，她是最后一个看见那美国人活着的人，我想，她以为你在怀疑她与这事有牵连，我能不能告诉她，是她误解了？说实在的，她这种人连苍蝇也不敢伤害的。”
    她微微一笑。
    “她是什么时候向哈伯德太太要阿司匹林的？”
    “十点半以后的事。”
    “她去了多久？”
    “五分钟左右。”
    “夜里她还离开过包房没有？”
    “没有。”
    波洛转向大夫。
    “雷切特被杀害的时间有没有可能比这更早？”
    大夫摇摇头。
    “那么，小姐，我想你可以告诉你的朋友，让她放心好了。”
    “谢谢。”她突然朝他一笑，这笑容很容易博得人们的同情。“你是知道的，她象一只绵羊，又是心焦，又是哭哭啼啼。”
    她转身走了。
12 THE EVIDENCE OF THE GERMAN LADY’S-MAID
12 THE EVIDENCE OF THE GERMAN LADY’S-MAID
M. Bouc was looking at his friend curiously.
“I do not quite understand you, mon vieux. You were trying to do—what?”
“I was searching for a flaw, my friend.”
“A flaw?”
“Yes—in the armour of a young lady’s self-possession. I wished to shake her sang-froid. Did I succeed? I do not know. But I know this: she did not expect me to tackle the matter as I did.”
“You suspect her,” said M. Bow slowly. “But why? She seems a very charming young lady—the last person in the world to be mixed up in a crime of this kind.”
“I agree,” said Constantine. “She is cold. She has not emotions. She would not stab a man—she would sue him in the law courts.”
Poirot sighed.
“You must, both of you, get rid of your obsession that this is an unpremeditated and sudden crime. As for the reasons why I suspect Miss Debenham, there are two. One is because of something that I overheard, and that you do not as yet know.”
He retailed to them the curious interchange of phrases he had overheard on the journey from Aleppo.
“That is curious, certainly,” said M. Bouc when he had finished. “It needs explaining. If it means what you suspect it means, then they are both of them in it together—she and the stiff Englishman.”
Poirot nodded.
“And that is just what is not borne out by the facts,” he said. “See you, if they were both in this together, what should we expect to find? That each of them would provide an alibi for the other. Is not that so? But no—that does not happen. Miss Debenham’s alibi is provided by a Swedish woman whom she has never seen before, and Colonel Arbuthnot’s alibi is vouched for by MacQueen, the dead mans secretary. No, that solution of the puzzle is too easy.”
“You said there was another reason for your suspicions of her,” M. Bouc, reminded him.
Poirot smiled.
“Ah! but that is only psychological. I ask myself, is it possible for Miss Debenham to have planned this crime? Behind this business, I am convinced, there is a cool, intelligent, resourceful brain. Miss Debenham answers to that description.”
M. Bouc shook his head. “I think you are wrong, my friend. I do not see that young English girl as a criminal.”
“Ah! Well,” said Poirot, picking up the last passport. “To the final name on our list. Hildegarde Schmidt, lady’s-maid.”
Summoned by the attendant, Hildegarde Schmidt came into the restaurant car and stood waiting respectfully.
Poirot motioned her to sit down.
She did so, folding her hands and waiting placidly till he questioned her. She seemed a placid creature altogether—eminently respectable, perhaps not over-intelligent.
Poirot’s methods with Hildegarde Schmidt were a complete contrast to his handling of Mary Debenham.
He was at his kindest and most genial, setting the woman at her ease. Then, having got her to write down her name and address, he slid gently into his questions.
The interview took place in German.
“We want to know as much as possible about what happened last night,” he said. “We know that you cannot give us much information bearing on the crime itself, but you may have seen or heard something that, while conveying nothing to you, may be valuable to us. You understand?”
She did not seem to. Her broad, kindly face remained set in its expression of placid stupidity as she answered:
“I do not know anything, Monsieur.”
“Well, for instance you know that your mistress sent for you last night.”
“That, yes.”
“Do you remember the time?”
“I do not, Monsieur. I was asleep, you see, when the attendant came and told me.”
“Yes, yes. Was it usual for you to be sent for in this way?”
“It was not unusual, Monsieur. The gracious lady often required attention at night. She did not sleep well.”
“Eh bien, then, you received the summons and you got up. Did you put on a dressing-gown?”
“No, Monsieur, I put on a few clothes. I would not like to go in to her Excellency in my dressing-gown.”
“And yet it is a very nice dressing-gown—scarlet, is it not?”
She stared at him. “It is a dark blue flannel dressing-gown, Monsieur.”
“Ah! continue. A little pleasantry on my part, that is all. So you went along to Madame la Princesse. And what did you do when you got there?”
“I gave her massage, Monsieur, and then I read aloud. I do not read aloud very well, but her Excellency says that is all the better—so it sends her better to sleep. When she became sleepy, Monsieur, she told me to go, so I closed the book and I returned to my own compartment.”
“Do you know what time that was?”
“No, Monsieur.”
“Well, how long had you been with Madame la Princesse?”
“About half an hour, Monsieur.”
“Good, continue.”
“First, I fetched her Excellency an extra rug from my compartment. It was very cold in spite of the heating. I arranged the rug over her, and she wished me good night. I poured her out some mineral water. Then I turned out the light and left her.
“And then?”
“There is nothing more, Monsieur. I returned to my carriage and went to sleep.”
“And you met no one in the corridor?”
“No, Monsieur.”
“You did not, for instance, see a lady in a scarlet kimono with dragons on it?”
Her mild eyes bulged at him. “No, indeed, Monsieur. There was nobody about except the attendant. Everyone was asleep.”
“But you did see the conductor?”
“Yes, Monsieur.”
“What was he doing!”
“He came out of one of the compartments, Monsieur.”
“What?” M. Bouc leaned forward. “Which one?”
Hildegarde Schmidt looked frightened again, and Poirot cast a reproachful glance at his friend.
“Naturally,” he said. “The conductor often has to answer bells at night. Do you remember which compartment it was?”
“It was about the middle of the coach, Monsieur. Two or three doors from Madame la Princesse.”
“Ah! tell us, if you please, exactly where this was and what happened?”
“He nearly ran into me, Monsieur. It was when I was returning from my compartment to that of the Princess with the rug.”
“And he came out of a compartment and almost collided with you. In which direction was he going?”
“Towards me, Monsieur. He apologised and passed on down the corridor towards the dining-car. A bell began ringing, but I do not think he answered it.” She paused and then said: “I do not understand. How is it—”
Poirot spoke reassuringly.
“It is just a question of time,” he said. “All a matter of routine. This poor conductor, he seems to have had a busy night—first waking you and then answering bells.”
“It was not the same conductor who woke me, Monsieur. It was another one.”
“Ah! another one! Had you seen him before?”
“No, Monsieur.”
“Ah!—do you think you would recognise him if you saw him?”
“I think so, Monsieur.”
Poirot murmured something in M. Bouc’s ear. The latter got up and went to the door to give an order.
Poirot was continuing his questions in an easy, friendly manner.
“Have you ever been to America, Fr?ulein Schmidt?”
“Never, Monsieur. It must be a fine country.”
“You have heard, perhaps, who this man who was killed really was—that he was responsible for the death of a little child?”
“Yes, I have heard, Monsieur. It was abominable—wicked. The good God should not allow such things. We are not so wicked as that in Germany.”
Tears had come into the woman’s eyes. Her strong, motherly soul was moved.
“It was an abominable crime,” said Poirot gravely.
He drew a scrap of cambric from his pocket and handed it to her.
“Is this your handkerchief, Fr?ulein Schmidt?”
There was a moment’s silence as the woman examined it. She looked up after a minute. The colour had mounted a little in her face.
“Ah! no, indeed. It is not mine, Monsieur.”
“It has the initial H, you see. That is why I thought it was yours.”
“Ah! Monsieur, it is a lady’s handkerchief, that. A very expensive handkerchief. Embroidered by hand. It comes from Paris, I should say.”
“It is not yours and you do not know whose it is?”
“I? Oh! no, Monsieur.”
Of the three listening, only Poirot caught the nuance of hesitation in the reply.
M. Bouc whispered in his ear. Poirot nodded and said to the woman:
“The three sleeping-car attendants are coming in. Will you be so kind as to tell me which is the one you met last night as you were going with the rug to the Princess?”
The three men entered. Pierre Michel, the big blond conductor of the Athens-Paris coach, and the stout burly conductor of the Bucharest one.
Hildegarde Schmidt looked at them and immediately shook her head.
“No, Monsieur,” she said. “None of these is the man I saw last night.”
“But these are the only conductors on the train. You must be mistaken.”
“I am quite sure, Monsieur. These are all tall, big men. The one I saw was small and dark. He had a little moustache. His voice when he said ‘Pardon’ was weak, like a woman’s. Indeed, I remember him very well, Monsieur.”
第十二章　德国女佣人的证词
第十二章　德国女佣人的证词
    鲍克先生好奇地打量着他的朋友。
    “先生，真叫人摸不透你的心思。你这是打的什么主意？”
    “我在找漏洞呢，朋友。”
    “漏洞？”
    “可不是。就在那位自制力很强的小姐身上找，我想冲击一下她的镇静。成功了吗？还不知道。可是，我知道，她准没想到我办案会用这种方法。”
    “你怀疑她，”鲍克先生慢吞吞地说。“有什么根据？那么年轻迷人的小姐，世人象她这种人跟‘杀人’是不会沾边的。”
    “这我同意。”康斯坦丁说，“她非常冷静沉着。一点也不动感情。有事，她不会去杀人，宁肯上法庭解决。”
    波洛叹了一口气。
    “你们两位都必须抛弃感情上的偏见，认为这是一起非预谋的，出于时冲动的谋杀案。
我之所以怀疑德贝汉小姐理由有两个：其一，根据我偶然听到的一句话；其二，此刻你们还不知道。”
    他把在离开阿勒颇的旅途上偶然听到的奇怪的谈话片断讲了一遍。
    “这话果真说得稀奇。”临了，鲍克先生说，“这倒要弄个明白。要是这符合你的怀疑，那么他们两人都插手这一案件──她和那个古板的英国人。”
    波波点点头。
    “这正是还没被事实所证实的。”他说，“你要知道，如果他们都卷进这一案件，我们能指望得到些什么呢──他们必然彼此证明对方不在现场。这不可能吗？是的，不会有这种事。索不相识的瑞典女人就给德贝汉小姐作证明，而阿巴思诺特上校就有被害人的秘书，麦克昆先生为他担保。不，解开这个谜并不难。”
    “你不是说过，怀疑她还有另一个原因。”鲍克先生提醒他。
    波洛微微一笑。
    “啊！可是这仅仅是心理上的。我问我自己，德贝汉小姐事先可有计划？干这种事，我确信，非有个冷静、聪明、深谋远虑的头脑不可。德贝汉小姐正符合这些条件。”
    鲍克先生摇摇头。
    “朋友，我看你是错了。我相信这位年轻的英国姑娘不象个杀人犯。”
    “啊，现在不谈这个。”波洛说，一面拿起最后一份护照。“可得会会名单上最后一个人，希尔德加德•施密特，女佣人。”
    希尔德加德•施密特被侍者唤进餐车，毕恭毕敬地站着。
    波洛招呼她坐下。
    她坐了下来，双手交叉着，平静地等待询问。总之，看来她人很文静──非常规矩，但不特别聪明。
    波洛对待希尔德加德•施密特的方法跟对玛丽•德贝汉的方法截然不同。
    他对她非常亲切，非常友好，使她不感到拘束。接着，让她写下自己的姓名和住址，然后才不知不觉引出问题来。
    他们用德语交谈。
    “我们想尽可能多地了解一些有亲昨晚发生的事。”他说，“我们知道，你不可能提供很多与谋杀案直接有关的情况，可是你可能看到或听到什么，这在你看来也许不值一提，但对我们或许很有价值。你可明白我的意思？”
    她好象并不明白。她那宽宽的，善良的面孔仍然是一种平静的，傻乎乎的表情。她说：
“先生，我什么也不知道。”
    “那么，比如说，你知不知道昨晚女主人唤过你？”
    “是的，有那么一回事。”
    “你可记得，那是什么时候？”
    “先生，记不得了。你知道，列车员员喊我时，我睡着了。”
    “正是，正是。通常都是这样来喊你的？”
    “先生，向来如此。我那高贵的女主人夜里经常要人侍候，她睡眠不好。”
    “啊，如此说来，你答应后就起床了。你穿着睡衣？”
    “没有，先生。我穿了点衣服。我不愿穿睡衣上老太太那去。”
    “看来那是一件挺美的睡衣──鲜红的，是不是？”
    她盯着波洛看了一眼。
    “先生，是深蓝色的，法兰绒的。”
    “哦，接着说吧。我这是说着玩的，没别的意思。后来你就上公爵夫人那边去了。那么在那儿你做了些什么事呢？”
    “我给她作了按摩，先生，然后念书给她听。我念得不很响，我家主人说，这更好，让她更容易入睡。待她快要睡着，她便让我走，我就合上书回到自己房里去了。”
    “你可知道，那是什么时间？”
    “不知道，先生。”
    “那么，你在公爵夫人那儿呆了多久？”
    “约摸半个小时，先生。”
    “她，接着说。”
    “开头，我从自己房里给我家主人拿了条毯子去，虽说有暧气，房里还是挺冷的。我把毯子给她盖上，她就祝我晚安，我给她倒了矿泉水，然后熄了灯就走了。”
    “后来呢？”
    “没什么，先生。我回房里就睡着了。”
    “在过道上你碰上过谁？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “比如说，没碰上穿绣有龙的鲜红睡衣的女人？”
    她睁大那温和的眼睛盯着他看。
    “先生，真的没有，除了列车员，四周没有人，大家都睡了。”
    “你看到列车员吗？”
    “是的，先生。”
    “他在干什么？”
    “他从一个房里出来，先生。”
    “什么？”鲍克先生把身子凑过去。“哪个包房？”
    希尔德加德•施密特又显得惊恐不安了。波洛责备地看了朋友一眼。
    “自然罗，夜里列车员听到铃声总得去的。你可记得哪个房间？”
    “先生，那是车厢中间，隔公爵夫人二、三个门。”
    “哦，要是愿意的话，请告诉我们，到底是哪个包房，发生了什么事？”
    “先生，他差点没撞上我，这时我正从自己的房里给公爵夫人送毯子。”
    “这么说，他从一个房间出来几乎跟你撞个满怀是不是？他朝哪个方向跑的？”
    “对着我，先生。他道了歉，断续往餐车那个方向跑。又响起一声铃，据我所知，他可没去。”
    她停了一会儿，接着说：“我可不明白，这是怎么……”
    波洛安慰她。
    “只是时间问题。”他说，“都是些例行公事，可怜的列车员这一晚够他忙的了──先是唤醒你，后来听到一次次的铃声不得去。”
    “他可不是把我唤醒的那位，先生。是另一位。”
    “唔，另一位？过去你见到过他？”
    “没有，先生。”
    “啊！再见到他你还认得出来吗？”
    “我想，认得出来的，先生。”
    波洛挨着鲍克先生的耳边咕噜了几句，后者立起身，走到门口下了一个命令。
    波洛友好地，无拘无束地断续问她。
    “施密特小姐，你去过美国吗？”
    “没去过，先生。那一定是个很美的国家。”
    “你也许听人说过，这个被害者是谁──他是杀死一个小女孩的凶手。”
    “是的，先生。我听说过。这么刻毒，简直可恶之极。善良的上帝决不会允许这种事发生的。我们德国人不会到样刻毒。”
    这女人的眼睛流出泪水。她那慈母般的心灵受感动了。
    “这是一件讨厌的谋杀案。”波洛伤心地说。
    他从口袋里掏出一块手帕递给她。
    “施密特小姐，这是你的手帕吧？”
    她细细端详手帕，沉默片刻，然后抬起头，脸色微微红了起来。
    “啊！不是我的，真的不是我的，先生。”
    “瞧，上面有个‘Ｈ’，我这才想到是你的。”
    “啊，先生，这种手帕只有小姐太太才使的，挺贵的。手工绣的。我说一定是巴黎贷。”
    “不是你的。那么你可知道，该是谁的？”
    “问我吗？哦，不知道，先生。”
    在三个听的人之中，只有波洛觉察到她的回答有点儿犹豫不定。
    鲍克先生在他的耳边嘀咕几句。波洛点点头，然后对她说：“列车里三个列车员这就来，请告诉我们，昨晚你给公爵地人送毯子时碰到的是哪一个，行吗？”
    三个列车员走了进来。米歇尔，高个子、金发的雅典──巴黎车厢的列车员以及布加勒斯特车厢上的那位肥胖的、粗壮的汉子。希尔德加德•施密特看了他们一眼，随即摇摇头。
    “不是，先生。”她说。“都不是昨晚我见到的。”
    “可是车上的列车员全在这儿啦，想必你弄错了？”
    “先生，没错，他们都长得很高大。我见到的那位个子很小，黑黑的，长着一小撮胡子。他说‘对不起’三安，象是女人说的。真的，我记得挺清楚哩，先生。”
13 SUMMARY OF THE PASSENGERS’ EVIDENCE
13 SUMMARY OF THE PASSENGERS’ EVIDENCE
“A small dark man with a womanish voice,” said M. Bouc.
The three conductors and Hildegarde Schmidt had been dismissed.
M. Bouc made a despairing gesture. “But I understand nothing—but nothing, of all of this! The enemy that this Ratchett spoke of, he was then on the train after all? But where is he now? How can he have vanished into thin air? My head, it whirls. Say something, then, my friend, I implore you. Show me how the impossible can be possible!”
“It is a good phrase that,” said Poirot. “The impossible cannot have happened, therefore the impossible must be possible in spite of appearances.”
“Explain to me, then, quickly, what actually happened on the train last night.”
“I am not a magician, mon cher. I am, like you, a very puzzled man. This affair advances in a very strange manner.”
“It does not advance at all. It stays where it was.”
Poirot shook his head. “No, that is not true. We are more advanced. We know certain things. We have heard the evidence of the passengers.”
“And what has that told us? Nothing at all.”
“I would not say that, my friend.”
“I exaggerate, perhaps. The American Hardman, and the German maid—yes, they have added something to our knowledge. That is to say, they have made the whole business more unintelligible than it was.”
“No, no, no,” said Poirot soothingly.
M. Bouc turned upon him. “Speak, then, let us hear the wisdom of Hercule Poirot.”
“Did I not tell you that I was, like you, a very puzzled man? But at least we can face our problem. We can arrange such facts as we have with order and method.”
“Pray continue, Monsieur,” said Dr. Constantine.
Poirot cleared his throat and straightened a piece of blotting-paper.
“Let us review the case as it stands at this moment. First, there are certain indisputable facts. This man, Ratchett or Cassetti, was stabbed in twelve places and died last night. That is fact one.”
“I grant it you—I grant it, mon vieux,” said M. Bouc with a gesture of irony.
Hercule Poirot was not at all put out. He continued calmly.
“I will pass over for the moment certain rather peculiar appearances which Dr. Constantine and I have already discussed together. I will come to them presently. The next fact of importance, to my mind, is the time of the crime.”
“That, again, is one of the few things we do know,” said M. Bouc. “The crime was committed at a quarter past one this morning. Everything goes to show that that was so.”
“Not everything. You exaggerate. There is, certainly, a fair amount of evidence to support that view.”
“I am glad you admit that at least.”
Poirot went on calmly, unperturbed by the interruption. “We have before us three possibilities.
“(1)—that the crime was committed, as you say, at a quarter past one. This is supported by the evidence of the watch, by the evidence of Mrs. Hubbard, and by the evidence of the German woman, Hildegarde Schmidt. It agrees with the evidence of Dr. Constantine.
“(2)—that the crime was committed later, and that the evidence of the watch was deliberately faked in order to mislead.
“(3)—that the crime was committed earlier, and the evidence faked for the same reason as above.
“Now if we accept possibility (1) as the most likely to have occurred, and the one supported by most evidence, we must also accept certain facts arising from it. If the crime was committed at a quarter past one, the murderer cannot have left the train, and the questions arise: Where is he? And who is he?
“To begin with, let us examine the evidence carefully. We first hear of the existence of this man—the small dark man with a womanish voice—from the man Hardman. He says that Ratchett told him of this person and employed him to watch out for the man. There is no evidence to support this; we have only Hardman’s word for it. Let us next examine the question: Is Hardman the person he pretends to be an operative of a New York detective agency?
“What to my mind is so interesting in this case is that we have none of the facilities afforded to the police. We cannot investigate the bona fides of any of these people. We have to rely solely on deduction. That, to me, makes the matter very much more interesting. There is no routine work. It is all a matter of the intellect. I ask myself: Can we accept Hardman’s account of himself? I make my decision and I answer ‘Yes.’ I am of the opinion that we can accept Hardman’s account of himself.”
“You rely on the intuition? What the Americans call ‘the hunch’?” asked Dr. Constantine.
“Not at all. I regard the probabilities. Hardman is travelling with a false passport—that will at once make him an object of suspicion. The first thing that the police will do when they do arrive upon the scene is to detain Hardman and cable as to whether his account of himself is true. In the case of many of the passengers, to establish their bona fides will be difficult; in most cases it will probably not be attempted, especially since there seems nothing in the way of suspicion attaching to them. But in Hardman’s case it is simple. Either he is the person he represents himself to be, or he is not. Therefore I say that all will prove to be in order.”
“You acquit him of suspicion?”
“Not at all. You misunderstand me. For all I know, any American detective might have his own private reasons for wishing to murder Ratchett. No, what I am saying is that I think we can accept Hardman’s own account of himself. This story, then, that he tells of Ratchett’s seeking him out and employing him is not unlikely, and is most probably—though not of course certainly—true. If we are going to accept it as true, we must see if there is any confirmation of it. We find it in rather an unlikely place—in the evidence of Hildegarde Schmidt. Her description of the man she saw in Wagon Lit uniform tallies exactly. Is there any further confirmation of these two stories? There is. There is the button that Mrs. Hubbard found in her compartment. And there is also another corroborating statement which you may not have noticed.”
“What is that?”
“The fact that both Colonel Arbuthnot and Hector MacQueen mention that the conductor passed their carriage. They attached no importance to the fact, but, Messieurs, Pierre Michel has declared that he did not leave his seat except on certain specified occasions—none of which would take him down to the far end of the coach past the compartment in which Arbuthnot and MacQueen were sitting.
“Therefore this story, the story of a small dark man with a womanish voice dressed in Wagon Lit uniform, rests on the testimony, direct or indirect, of four witnesses.”
“One small point,” said Dr. Constantine. “If Hildegarde Schmidt’s story is true, how is it that the real conductor did not mention having seen her when he came to answer Mrs. Hubbard’s bell?”
“That is explained, I think. When he arrived to answer Mrs. Hubbard, the maid was in with her mistress. When she finally returned to her own compartment, the conductor was in with Mrs. Hubbard.”
M. Bouc had been waiting with difficulty until they had finished.
“Yes, yes, my friend,” he said impatiently to Poirot. “But whilst I admire your caution, your method of advancing a step at a time, I submit that you have not yet touched the point at issue. We are all agreed that this person exists. The point is, where did he go?”
Poirot shook his head reprovingly.
“You are in error. You are inclined to put the cart before the horse. Before I ask myself, ‘Where did this man vanish to?’ I ask myself, ‘Did such a man really exist?’ Because, you see, if the man were an invention—a fabrication—how much easier to make him disappear! So I try to establish first that there really is such a flesh-and-blood person.”
“And having arrived at the fact that there is—eh bien, where is he now?”
“There are only two answers to that, mon cher. Either he is still hidden on the train in a place of such extraordinary ingenuity that we cannot even think of it; or else he is, as one might say, two persons. That is, he is both himself—the man feared by M. Ratchett—and a passenger on the train so well disguised that M. Ratchett did not recognise him.”
“It is an idea, that,” said M. Bouc, his face lighting up. Then it clouded over again. “But there is one objection—”
Poirot took the words out of his mouth.
“The height of the man. It is that you would say? With the exception of Mr. Ratchett’s valet, all the passengers are big men—the Italian, Colonel Arbuthnot, Hector MacQueen, Count Andrenyi. Well, that leaves us the valet—not a very likely supposition. But there is another possibility. Remember the ‘womanish’ voice. That gives us a choice of alternatives. The man may be disguised as a woman, or, alternatively, he may actually be a woman. A tall woman dressed in men’s clothes would look small.”
“But surely Ratchett would have known—”
“Perhaps he did know. Perhaps, already, this woman had attempted his life, wearing a mares clothes the better to accomplish her purpose. Ratchett may have guessed that she would use the same trick again, so he tells Hardman to look for a man. But he mentions, however, a womanish voice.”
“It is a possibility,” said M. Bouc. “But—”
“Listen, my friend, I think that I should now tell you of certain inconsistencies noticed by Dr. Constantine.”
He retailed at length the conclusions that he and the doctor had arrived at together from the nature of the dead man’s wounds. M. Bouc groaned and held his head again. “I know,” said Poirot sympathetically. “I know exactly how you feel. The head spins, does it not?”
“The whole thing is a fantasy!” cried M. Bouc.
“Exactly. It is absurd—improbable—it cannot be. So I myself have said. And yet, my friend, there it is! One cannot escape from the facts.”
“It is madness!”
“Is it not? It is so mad, my friend, that sometimes I am haunted by the sensation that really it must be very simple. ... But that is only one of my ‘little ideas’!”
“Two murderers,” groaned M. Bouc. “And on the Orient Express—”
The thought almost made him weep.
“And now let us make the fantasy more fantastic,” said Poirot cheerfully. “Last night on the train, there are two mysterious strangers. There is the Wagon Lit attendant answering to the description given us by M. Hardman, and seen by Hildegarde Schmidt, Colonel Arbuthnot and M. MacQueen. There is also a woman in a red kimono—a tall slim woman, seen by Pierre Michel, Miss Debenham, M. MacQueen and myself (and smelt, I may say, by Colonel Arbuthnot!). Who was she? No one on the train admits to having a scarlet kimono. She, too, has vanished. Was she one and the same with the spurious Wagon Lit attendant? Or was she some quite distinct personality? Where are they, these two? And incidentally, where are the Wagon Lit uniform and the scarlet kimono?”
“Ah! that is something definite.” M. Bouc sprang up eagerly. “We must search all the passengers’ luggage. Yes, that will be something.”
Poirot rose also. “I will make a prophecy,” he said.
“You know where they are?”
“I have a little idea.”
“Where, then?”
“You will find the scarlet kimono in the baggage of one of the men, and you will find the uniform of the Wagon Lit conductor in the baggage of Hildegarde Schmidt.”
“Hildegarde Schmidt? You think—”
“Not what you are thinking. I will put it like this. If Hildegarde Schmidt is guilty, the uniform may be found in her baggage. But if she is innocent, it certainly will be.”
“But how—” began M. Bouc and stopped. “What is this noise that approaches?” he cried. “It resembles a locomotive in motion.”
The noise drew nearer. It consisted of shrill cries and protests in a woman’s voice. The door at the end of the dining-car burst open. Mrs. Hubbard burst in.
“It’s too horrible!” she cried. It’s just too horrible. In my sponge-bag. My sponge-bag! A great knife—all over blood?”
And suddenly toppling forward, she fainted heavily on M. Bouc’s shoulder.
第十三章　证词摘要
第十三章　证词摘要             
    “一个小个儿，黑脸膛，说话象女人的男人。”鲍克先生说。
    三位列车员和希尔德加德•施密特早已被打发走了。
    鲍克先生绝望地挥挥手。
    “这一切叫人摸不透，没一点儿叫人摸得透！雷切特提到的仇敌，到头来竟还在车上？
可现在在哪里？他怎么能消失得无影无踪了呢？我的头给搅得发晕了。朋友，求你说些什么吧。说说，不可能的事又怎么会变得可能呢？”
    “说得好。”波洛说，“不可能的事原不会发生，因而不管表面现象如何，发生的事必然是可能的。”
    “快给我说个明白，昨晚到底发生的是件甚么样的案子？”
    “先生，我不是魔术师，跟你们一样，我也迷惑不解。这案子进展异乎寻常。”
    “毫无进展，原封未动。”
    波洛摇摇头。
    “不，这不是事实。案子颇有进展。我们了解到一些事实，我们听了旅客的证词。”
    “这些证词告诉了我们什么呢？什么也没有。”
    “朋友，我可不这知说。”
    “也许，我夸大了些。那美国人，哈特曼，还有德国女佣人──是的，他们是提供了些线索。可以说，正是他们使得整个案子比原来更费解了。”
    “不，不，不。”波洛平静地说。
    鲍克先生反唇相讥。
    “好吧，我们就来听听聪明的赫卡尔•波洛的高见。”
    “我不是说过吗，跟你们一样，我也是迷惑不解。但至少，我们可以着手解决难题了。
我们可以按次序有条理地把现有的事实整理出来。”
    “先生，请往下说。”康斯坦丁大夫说。
    波洛清了清嗓子，一面把一张吸水纸弄平。
    “让我们先根据案情的发展，来回顾一下这个案子。首先，就有这么一些无可争辩的事实。这个雷切特，或者凯赛梯，被人刺了十二刀，死于昨晚。这是其一。”
    “算你说得对，算你说得对。先生。”鲍克先生嘲弄地挥挥手，说道。
    波洛听了根本没有被窘住，仍然心平气和地接着说：“康斯坦丁大夫和我一起曾讨论过一些很奇怪的现象。此刻，暂且不提。留待以后再说。另一件非常重要的事实，依我之见，便是作案时间。”
    “人人皆知，没什么新鲜的东西。”鲍克先生说。“案子发生在凌晨一点一刻。所有的事实都可证明这一点。”
    “绝非所有的事实，你又夸大了。当然，有那么一些事实可证明这一论点。”
    “我很高兴，至少你肯承认这一点。”
    波洛不为他的插话所干扰，仍然坦然地说下去：
    “摆在我们面前有三种可能性：
    “第一，正如你所说的，作案时间是一点一刻。德国女佣人希尔德加德•施密特的话可以作证，也符合康斯坦丁大夫提供的证据。
    “第二，作案时间可能迟些，表是有意制造的伪证。
    “第三，作案时间可能更早，表是伪证，理由同上。
    “现在，如果我们接受第一种可能性（因为它存在的可能性最大，证据最足）我们必然要碰到另一些随之而产生的疑问：首先，如果案子发生在一点一刻，而凶手不能逃离火车，那么问题就出来了：他在哪儿？他是谁？
    “让我们先来仔细研究一下证词。我们首先是听说有这么一个男子──小个子黑脸膛，说放象女人。这是哈特曼说的。他说，这是雷切特告诉他的，雷切特雇他提防这个人。可是没有证据──我们只有哈特曼的几句话而已。深入地想一想，就不禁要问：哈特曼这个人，他那纽约侦探办事处的身份是不是伪造的呢？
    “回想起来，真有趣，在办这个案子过程中，我们竟缺少足够的通讯工具，以保持与警方联系。因此，就谈不上彻底调查这些人。我们只能凭推理。在我看来，这使得案子越发显得饶有趣味，没有审判程序，而只凭智力。我问过自己：‘哈特曼的自我介绍可以接受吗？’我的结论是肯定的。我同意这种观点：我们可接受哈特曼的自我介绍。”
    “你相信直觉──美国人称之为预感的吧？”康斯坦丁大夫说。
    “不相信，我所注意的是可能性。哈特曼如果持假护照外出旅行，他即刻就成为怀疑对象。警察一到场，第一件事就是拘留哈特曼，与纽约通叫查问他的身份是否属实。如果这起案件要涉及许多旅客，要彻底查清真相是相当难的，在大多数情况下也许连试也不会去试呢，尤其是这些人看来没有谁值得怀疑的情况下。不过，哈特曼的情况就简单多了，不论他声称的身份是否属实。所以，我说，一切都会证明是合理的。”
    “你不怀疑他啦？”
    “没有的事，你曲解了我的意思。据我所知，任何美国侦探都可能有各自的理由，希望杀死雷切特。不，我说的是，我想，我们可以接受哈特曼的自我介绍。那么，他所说的雷切特挑选他并雇用他的故事未必不是实话，虽说不那么肯定，但可能性是很大的。如果我们承认这是真话，我们就必须调查清楚，是否确有证据。强果，我们在一个很不可靠的地方──希尔德加德•施密特的证词中找到佐证。她所说的亲眼目睹穿列车员制服的人的特征完全相符。那末，还有没有进一步的证据，证实两人说的话呢？那就哈伯德太太捡到的那颗钮扣了。此外，还有另一确证，你们也许没有注意到。”
    “什么确证？”
    “那就是阿巴思诺特上校和麦克昆两人先后都已提到，列车员经过他们的房间。他们并不重视这一事实，但是，先生们，皮埃尔•米歇尔坚持说，除了已提到过的时间，他从未离开过座位，他更没有必要到车厢那一头去，从而经过阿巴思诺特和麦克昆坐着聊天的那个包房。因此，小个子、黑脸膛、说话象女人、穿列车员制服的人的故事已直接或间接地为四位证人所证实。”
    “有个小问题，”康斯坦丁大夫说，“如果希尔德加德•施密特所说的属实，那位真列车员怎么没提到，在去哈伯德太太的铃声的召唤时，曾见到过她？”
    鲍克先生急不可耐地等待他们把话说完。
    “得了，得了，我的朋友。”他性急地对波洛说，“虽说对你的好奇心，你那一步一个脚印的办法，我非常敬佩，但要指出的是，你尚未接触到争论的焦点。我们都同意确实存见这么一个人。问题是──他到哪儿去了？”
    波洛摇摇头。露出非难的神情。
    “你错了。你这是本末倒置。在问‘这个人躲到哪儿去了’之前，你首先要问自己：
‘是否确有其人？’因为，你瞧，如果这个人是虚构的──臆造的──他就能轻而易举消失掉！所以，首先我要确定确有这么一个有血有肉的人。”
    “既然已经明确这一事实──是呀──那么，他现在在哪儿呢？”
    “先生，只有两个答案，要么他还极为巧妙地躲在车上一个我们所难以想到的处所；要么，正如有人所说，他是两个人。也就是说，他既是雷切特先生提防的那个人，又是车上的某一旅客，伪装得十分巧妙，连雷切特先生也认不出来了。”
    “这可说对了，”鲍克先生的脸孔顿时明朗起来，但很快又变得阴沉了。“可是，还有一点不同的看法──”
    波洛不等他说完，抢过话头：
    “此人的身高。你要说的是不是这话？除了雷切特先生的佣人，车上的旅客全是高个儿──意大利人、阿巴思诺特上校、麦克昆以及安德烈伯爵。那么只有这个佣人了──这种假设不十分可靠。还有另一种可能性。别忘了‘说话象女人’。为此，我们就有另一种选择的余地。或者，这是个装成女人的男人，或者，反之，他本来就不是女人，高个子的女人穿上男人衣服看上去势必矮小。”
    “可是，事实上，雷切特应该知道──”
    “也许他是知道。也许，这个女人存心要他的命，早先曾扮过男装，以得于达到她的目的。雷切特可能猜到她又要玩这种手法，所以告诉哈特曼留神一个男人。不过，他已提到过‘说话象女人’。”
    “有这可能，”鲍克先生说，“只是──”
    “朋友，听着。我想，我该告诉你，康斯坦丁大夫已经注意到的某些矛盾。”
    他详细地谈了他和康斯坦丁大夫一起曾从死者身上的伤处得出的一些推论。鲍克先生“啊”地喊了一声，又把头抬起来。
    “我理解，”波洛同情地说，“我完全理解此刻你的心情，你的头还在发晕，是吗？”
    “整个案子简直就是幻想曲。”鲍克先生大声叫了起来。
    “对极了。荒谬绝伦──难以想象──不可能存在。我自己就是这么想过。可是，朋友，是这么一回事！谁也不能回避事实。”
    “简直搞糊涂了！”
    “能不糊涂？朋友，它使我糊涂有时有这么一个念头，觉得事情实际一定很简单。可是这不过是一个‘小小的’想法……”
    “有两个凶手，”鲍克先生哼哼唧唧地说，“在东方快车上。”
    这个想法也许使他简直哭出来。
    “现在让我们使这部幻想曲变得越发玄妙吧。”波洛兴致勃勃地说。“昨天晚上车上有两个陌生的神秘旅客。一个是列车员，模样与哈特曼先生说的，希尔德加德•施密特、阿巴思诺特上校以及麦克昆先生所见的相符。还有一个女人，身穿鲜红睡衣──高高的个儿，细长身材──皮埃尔•米歇尔、德贝汉小姐、麦克昆有及我自己看到过──也可以说，是阿巴思诺特上校所闻到她身上的香水味的那个！她是谁呢？车上谁也不承认有鲜红色的睡衣，她也失踪了。她和那虚构的列车员是同一人吗？或者，她是一个某种非常独特的人物？这两个人在哪儿？顺便提一句，那么列车员制服和红睡衣哪去了呢？”
    “啊！这话说得倒也有理。”鲍克先生急切地跳了起来。“我们必须搜查旅客的行李。
是的，那样也许会发现一点线索来。”
    波洛站起身来。
    “我可以预言。”他说。
    “你知道东西在哪儿？”
    “我有一点想法。”
    “那么，到底在哪儿呢？”
    “你可以在一个男人的行李中发现那件鲜红的睡衣，在希尔德加德•施密特的行李中找到列车员的制服。”
    “希尔德加德•施密特？你以为──？”
    “跟你想的不一样。我是这样想的。如果希尔德加德•施密特是有罪的，列车员制服也许可以在她的行李中找到；但是如果她是无辜的，制服必然在她那里。”
    “可是，怎么──”鲍克先生刚开口，却没有说下去。
    “这是什么声音，越来越近了？”他喊了起来。“象是机车开动的声音。”
    声音越来越近，里面在刺耳的喊声，也有女人的申辩声。餐车尽头的门猛地被推开，哈伯德太太闯了进来。
    “太可怕了，”她嚷道。“简直太可怕了。我的手提包里，我的手提包里有一把大刀──全是血。”
    说话间，她的身子往前一倾，重重地倒在鲍克先生的肩上。
14 THE EVIDENCE OF THE WEAPON
14 THE EVIDENCE OF THE WEAPON

With more vigour than chivalry, A Bouc deposited the fainting lady with her head on the table. Dr. Constantine yelled for one of the restaurant attendants, who came at a run.
“Keep her head so,” said the doctor. “If she revives give her a little cognac. You understand?”
Then he hurried off after the other two. His interest lay wholly in the crime—swooning middle-aged ladies did not interest him at all.
It is possible that Mrs. Hubbard revived rather more quickly by these methods than she might otherwise have done. A few minutes later she was sitting up, sipping cognac from a glass proffered by the attendant, and talking once more.
“I just can’t tell you how terrible it was! I don’t suppose anybody on this train can understand my feelings. I’ve always been very, very sensitive ever since I was a child. The mere sight of blood—ugh! Why, even now I get faint when I think about it!”
The attendant proffered the glass again. “Encore un peu, Madame?”
“D’you think I’d better? I’m a lifelong teetotaller. I never touch spirits or wine at any time. All my family are abstainers. Still, perhaps as this is only medicinal—”
She sipped once more.
In the meantime Poirot and M. Bouc, closely followed by Dr. Constantine, had hurried out of the restaurant car and along the corridor of the Stamboul coach towards Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment.
Every traveller on the train seemed to be congregated outside the door. The conductor, a harassed look on his face, was keeping them back.
“Mais il n’y a rien à voir,” he said, and repeated the sentiment in several other languages.
“Let me pass if you please,” said M. Bouc.
Squeezing his rotundity past the obstructing passengers he entered the compartment, Poirot close behind him.
“I am glad you have come, Monsieur,” said the conductor with a sigh of relief. “Everyone has been trying to enter. The American lady—such screams as she gave—ma foi, I thought she too had been murdered! I came at a run, and there she was screaming like a mad woman; and she cried out that she must fetch you, and she departed screeching at the top of her voice and telling everybody whose carriage she passed what had occurred.”
He added, with a gesture of the hand: “It is in there, Monsieur. I have not touched it.”
Hanging on the handle of the door that gave access to the next compartment was a large-checked rubber sponge-bag. Below it on the floor, just where it had fallen from Mrs. Hubbard’s hand, was a straight-bladed dagger—a cheap affair, sham Oriental with an embossed hilt and a tapering blade. The blade was stained with patches of what looked like rust.
Poirot picked it up delicately.
“Yes,” he murmured. “There is no mistake. Here is our missing weapon all right—eh, doctor?”
The doctor examined it.
“You need not be so careful,” said Poirot. “There will be no fingerprints on it save those of Mrs. Hubbard.” Constantine’s examination did not take long.
“It is the weapon all right,” he said. “It would account for any of the wounds.”
“I implore you, my friend, do not say that!” The doctor looked astonished.
“Already we are heavily overburdened by coincidence. Two people decided to stab M. Ratchett last night. It is too much of a good thing that both of them should select the same weapon.”
“As, to that, the coincidence is not perhaps so great as it seems,” said the doctor. “Thousands of these sham Eastern daggers are made and shipped to the bazaars of Constantinople.”
“You console me a little, but only a little,” said Poirot.
He looked thoughtfully at the door in front of him, then, lifting off the sponge-bag, he tried the handle. The door did not budge. About a foot above the handle was the door bolt. Poirot drew it back and tried again, but still the door remained fast.
“We locked it from the other side, you remember,” said the doctor.
“That is true,” said Poirot absently. He seemed to be thinking about something else. His brow was furrowed as though in perplexity.
“It agrees, does it not?” said M. Bouc. “The man passes through this carriage. As he shuts the communicating door behind him he feels the sponge-bag. A thought comes to him and he quickly slips the blood-stained knife inside. Then, all unwitting that he has awakened Mrs. Hubbard, he slips out through the other door into the corridor.”
“As you say,” murmured Poirot. “That is how it must have happened.” But the puzzled look did not leave his face.
“But what is it?” demanded M. Bouc. “There is something, is there not, that does not satisfy you?”
Poirot darted a quick took at him.
“The same point does not strike you? No, evidently not. Well, it is a small matter.”
The conductor looked into the carriage. “The American lady is coming back.”
Dr. Constantine looked rather guilty. He had, he felt, treated Mrs. Hubbard rather cavalierly. But she had no reproaches for him. Her energies were concentrated on another matter.
“I’m going to say one thing right out,” she said breathlessly as she arrived in the doorway. “I’m not going on any longer in this compartment! Why, I wouldn’t sleep in it to-night if you paid me a million dollars.”
“But, Madame—”
“I know what you are going to say, and I’m telling you right now that I won’t do any such thing! Why, I’d rather sit up all night in the corridor.” She began to cry. “Oh, if my daughter could only know—if she could see me now, why—”
Poirot interrupted firmly.
“You misunderstand, Madame. Your demand is most reasonable. Your baggage shall be changed at once to another compartment.”
Mrs. Hubbard lowered her handkerchief. “is that so? Oh! I feel better right away. But surely it’s all full, unless one of the gentlemen—”
M. Bouc spoke.
“Your baggage, Madame, shall be moved out of this coach altogether. You shall have a compartment in the next coach, which was put on at Belgrade.”
“Why, that’s splendid. I’m not an extra nervous woman, but to sleep in that compartment next door to a dead man!” She shivered. “It would drive me plumb crazy.”
“Michel,” called M. Bouc. “Move this baggage into a vacant compartment in the Athens-Paris coach.”
“Yes, Monsieur. The same one as this—the No. 3?”
“No,” said Poirot before his friend could reply. “I think it would be better for Madame to have a different number altogether. The No. 12, for instance.”
“Bien, Monsieur.”
The conductor seized the luggage. Mrs. Hubbard turned gratefully to Poirot.
“That’s very kind and delicate of you. I appreciate it, I assure you.”
“Do not mention it, Madame. We will come with you and see you comfortably installed.”
Mrs. Hubbard was escorted by the three men to her new home. She looked round her happily. “This is fine.”
“It suits you, Madame? It is, you see, exactly like the compartment you have left.”
“That’s so—only it faces the other way. But that doesn’t matter, for these trains go first one way and then the other. I said to my daughter, ‘I want a carriage facing the engine.’ and she said, ‘Why, Mamma, that’ll be no good to you, for if you go to sleep one way, when you wake up, the train’s going the other!’ And it was quite true what she said. Why, last evening we went into Belgrade one way and out the other.”
“At any rate, Madame, you are quite happy and contented now?”
“Well, no, I wouldn’t say that. Here we are stuck in a snowdrift and nobody doing anything about it, and my boat sailing the day after to-morrow.”
“Madame,” said M. Bouc, “we are all in the same case—every one of us.”
“Well, that’s true,” admitted Mrs. Hubbard. “But nobody else has had a murderer walking right through her compartment in the middle of the night.
“What still puzzles me, Madame,” said Poirot, “is how the man got into your compartment if the communicating door was bolted as you say. You are sure that it was bolted?”
“Why, the Swedish lady tried it before my eyes.”
“Let us just reconstruct that little scene. You were lying in your bunk—so—and you could not see for yourself, you say?”
“No, because of the sponge-bag. Oh! my, I shall have to get a new sponge-bag. It makes me feel sick at my stomach to look at this one.”
Poirot picked up the sponge-bag and hung it on the handle of the communicating door into the next carriage.
“Précisément. I see,” he said. “The bolt is just underneath the handle—the sponge-bag masks it. You could not see from where you were lying whether the bolt was turned or not.”
“Why, that’s just what I’ve been telling you!”
“And the Swedish lady, Miss Ohlsson, stood so, between you and the door. She tried it and told you it was bolted.”
“That’s so.”
“All the same, Madame, she may have made an error. You see what I mean.” Poirot seemed anxious to explain. “The bolt is just a projection of metal—so. When it is turned to the right, the door is locked. When it is left straight, the door is unlocked. Possibly she merely tried the door, and as it was locked on the other side she may have assumed that it was locked on your side.”
“Well, I guess that would be rather stupid of her.”
“Madame, the most kind, the most amiable, are not always the cleverest.”
“That’s so, of course.”
“By the way, Madame, did you travel out to Smyrna this way?”
“No. I sailed right to Stamboul, and a friend of my daughter’s, Mr. Johnson (a perfectly lovely man, I’d like to have you know him), met me and showed me all round Stamboul. But it was a very disappointing city—all tumbling down; and as for those mosques, and putting on those great shuffling things over your shoes—where was I?”
“You were saying that Mr. Johnson met you.”
“That’s so, and he saw me on board a French Messageries boat for Smyrna, and my daughter’s husband was waiting right on the quay. What he’ll say when he hears about all this! My daughter said this would be just the safest, easiest way imaginable. ‘You just sit in your carriage,’ she said, ‘and you land right in Parrus, and there the American Express will meet you.’ And, oh, dear, what am I to do about cancelling my steamship passage? I ought to let them know. I can’t possibly make it now. This is just too terrible—”
Mrs. Hubbard showed signs of tears once more.
Poirot, who had been fidgeting slightly, seized his opportunity.
“You have had a shock, Madame. The restaurant attendant shall be instructed to bring you along some tea and some biscuits.”
“I don’t know that I’m so set on tea,” said Mrs. Hubbard tearfully. “That’s more an English habit.”
“Coffee, then, Madame. You need some stimulant—”
“That cognac’s made my head feel mighty funny. I think I would like some coffee.”
“Excellent. You must revive your forces.”
“My, what a funny expression!”
“But first, Madame, a little matter of routine. You permit that I make a search of your baggage!”
“What for?”
“We are about to commence a search of all the passengers’ luggage. I do not want to remind you of an unpleasant experience, but your sponge-bag—remember.”
“Mercy! Perhaps you’d better! I just couldn’t bear to get any more surprises of that kind.”
The examination was quickly over. Mrs. Hubbard was travelling with the minimum of luggage—a hat-box, a cheap suitcase, and a well-burdened travelling bag. The contents of all three were simple and straightforward, and the examination would not have taken more than a couple of minutes had not Mrs. Hubbard delayed matters by insisting on due attention being paid to photographs of “my daughter” and of two rather ugly children—“my daughter’s children. Aren’t they cunning?”
第十四章　凶器
第十四章　凶器             
    鲍克先生比古代骑士还要精力充沛，用力把昏死过去的哈伯德太太拖到餐桌上。康斯坦丁大夫对一个跑过来的餐车侍者吆喝道：
    “头这么放着，”大夫说，“要是醒过来，就让她喝点儿白兰地，明白吗？”
    接着，他跟着另外两人急匆匆地走了。他的全部兴趣集中在案子上，对昏过去的中年太太不感兴趣。
    用了这些办法以后，哈伯德太太很快就醒过来了，要是用过去的老办法，她才不会这么快就醒来呢。数分钟以后，她已坐立起来，就着列车员递过去的玻璃杯，一口一口呷起白兰地来。她又开口说话了：
    “简直说不出有多可怕。我猜，我的心情车上谁也理解不了。从小，我就是个非──非常敏感的人。一见血──呸，想起这脏东西就叫人头昏眼花。”
    列车员再把玻璃杯递过去。
    “再来一口吧，太太。”
    “你不以为我好些吗？我是个终身的戒酒主义者，我这辈子可是滴酒不沾的。我们家的人全不喝酒这类玩意儿。不过，现在这会儿反正是当药的──”
    她又呷了一口。
    波洛和鲍克先生，后面紧跟着康斯坦丁大夫，早已急匆匆离开餐车，沿着过道向哈伯德太太包房走去。
    车上的旅客似乎全被引到门外过道来了。列车员，焦急不安，催着大家回去。
    “什么没好看的。”他说，还用好几种语言，重复这句话。
    “借光，借光。”鲍克先生说道。
    他那肥胖的身子硬是挤过围得严严实实的旅客的人群，进了包房，波洛紧紧跟上。
    “诸位先生，你们来了，我真高兴。”列车员松了一口气。“谁都想进来。美国的太太──如此大声尖叫──我的天呀！我以为她也让人给杀了哩！我跑了进去，只见她发疯似地在叫喊，她嚷着要把你们找来，然后自己跑开去，声嘶力竭地尖着嗓子嚷，每以过一个包房。她便把发生的事跟人家诉说一通。”
    他做了一个手势，补充道：“它就在这儿，先生，我没动过。”
    与隔壁相通的门拉手上挂着一只大号的方格手提包，下面地板上，有一把哈伯德太太手中掉下来的匕首──一把便宜的，仿造的东方匕首。刀柄凸凹不平，刀片呈锥形，沾着斑斑点点，象是锈迹的东西。
    波洛小心翼翼地把刀拾起。
    “是呀，”他自言自语，“错不了，正是我们要找的凶器，是不是，大夫？”
    大夫细细端详着。
    “用着那么小心，上面除了哈伯德太太的指纹，没别人的了。”
    大夫没看多久。
    “正是凶器。”他说，“看伤口就明白了。”
    “朋友，请不要这么说。”
    医生显得很惊讶。
    “这种巧合早已压得我们喘不过气来了。昨晚两个人要谋杀雷切特先生，而两个人都选用同一种刀子，这样做到头来反而坏事。”
    “这个么，也许不那么巧。”大夫说，“这仿造的东方匕首，运到君士坦丁堡，在市场上出售的何止千万。”
    “我只得到一点儿安慰，只一点儿。”波洛说。
    他若有所思地打量面前的门，然后拿起手提包，拉了拉门，门动也不动。拉手上方约摸一英尺的地方是插销，波洛把插销拉出来，再拉拉门，门还是纹丝不动。
    “别忘了，另一边已锁上了。”大夫说。
    “说得对。”波洛心不焉，仿佛在想着别的什么事。他的眉毛紧锁，象是心事重重。
    “很能说明问题，是吗？”鲍克先生说，“那个人是经过这个包房出去的。当他随手关门时，摸到了这只手提包，便灵机一动，匆忙中把沾满血的刀塞进去，无意间惊醒了哈伯德太太，他就从她的房门溜到过道上去。”
    “照你这么说，”波洛自言自语，“事情一定是这样发生的了。”
    但是，看他那神情，仍然是疑虑重重。
    “你这是怎么了。”鲍克先生问道。“好象还有什么东西使你不满意似的，是吗？”
    波洛迅速地瞟了他一眼。
    “同是这一点，它没有引起你的注意吗？显然没有。不过，小事一桩。”
    列车员把头探了进来。
    “美国太太回来了。”
    康斯坦丁大夫自觉内疚，他感到自己一时对哈伯德太太怠慢了。但是她却不怪罪他。她的精力集中在另外的事上。
    “我只是说一件事就出去的，”跨进门，她气喘吁吁。“我再也不在这房里呆下去了。
啊！哪怕给我一百万块钱，今晚我也不睡在这儿了。”
    “可是，太太──”
    “我知道你要说什么。我这就告诉你，这样我坚决不干！哼，我宁可在过道上坐个通宵。”
    她哭起来了。
    “哎哟，要是我的女儿知道──要是她瞧见我现在这个模样，那──”
    波洛立刻打断她的话。
    “你误解了，太太。你的要求合情合理。你的行李马上就会给搬到另一个包房去的。”
    哈伯德太太放下手帕。
    “是吗？哦，这会儿我觉得好些了。可是，说真的，我的行李都塞得满满的，除非请一位先生──”
    鲍克先生开口了。
    “太太，会有人把你的行李统统搬走的。在另一节，贝尔格莱德挂上的车厢上会为你安排好铺位的。”
    “太好了，我可不是那种给人添麻烦的神经质的女人。在隔壁在死人的房里睡觉──”
她打了个哆嗦，“会把我逼疯的。”
    “米歇尔，”鲍克先生唤道，“把这些行李搬到雅典──巴黎车厢的空着的包房中去。”
    “是，先生，也是在──三号吗？”
    “不，”波洛没等他的朋友开口，抢先说道，“我想，还是不要让这位太太住在同一号码的房间为好。比如说，换十二号吧。”
    “是，先生。”
    列车员一把拎起行李，哈伯德太太转身对波洛表示十会感激。
    “你心肠真好，想得真周到。我挺满意。放心好了。”
    “别客气了，太太。我们会过去拜访你那满意的新居的。”
    哈伯德太太在三人的护送下来到新换的包房。看来她满心欢喜。
    “称心吗，太太？跟你的搬出的包房不相上下吧？”
    “可不是──只是朝向不同，但这不要紧。火车嘛，一会朝东，一会向西，朝向哪有不变的。我跟我的女儿说：‘我要坐对着火车头的房间。’她说：‘不，妈，这对你可不合适。因为你睡时是这个朝向，醒过来又换个朝向。’她说得挺对。不是吗，昨晚我们是这个方向进贝尔格莱德，出来时又变了。”
    “至少，太太，现在你总欢喜满足了吧？”
    “不，我可不这么说。我们还陷在雪中，又没有人去过问，而我的船后天就要开了。”
    “太太，”鲍克先生说，“我们大家都被同一案子牵扯进去了，没一例外。”
    “你这话很对，”哈伯德太太说，“不过，别人就不会碰到杀人凶手夜半三更闯进房里来这样的事。”
    “太太，我还不明白。”波洛说，“要是门如你所说闩着的话，那人怎么会跑到你的房里去呢？你能肯定，门是闩上的？”
    “怎么不呢？瑞典太太当着我的面试过的。”
    “我们回忆一下一桩小事。你躺在床上──如此，你就看不到啦，是不是？”
    “不，因为挂着手提包呢。噢，哎呀，我非买个新的不可了。看见它就使人恶心。”
    波洛拾起手提包，挂到那两房相通的拉手上。
    “非常正确──我明白了。”他说，“插销就在拉手下面──让旅行包遮住了──你躺着可看不到门是不是闩着。”
    “哎呀，这正是我方才说的话嘛。”
    “再说瑞典太太，奥尔逊是这么站着，就在你和门中间。她拉了拉就说，门闩着的。”
    “是这样。”
    “太太，要不该是她错了。你明白我的意思吧？”波洛显得急着要说个明白的样子。
“插销不过是根金属做的玩意儿。瞧，这么着，往右一推，门锁上了，往左一板，门没锁。
也许她只是试了试门。因为那边的门闩着，她以为你这边也是闩着的。”
    “我想，这样她这人是够糊涂的了。”
    “太太，不过心肠最好，待人和气的人并不是处处都聪明。”
    “这话不假，是这个样。”
    “顺便问一句，太太，你去士麦那也是乘火车？”
    “不，我乘船直接上伊斯坦布尔。我的女儿的一个朋友──约翰逊先生──迎接我，领我到伊斯坦布尔观光。不过，这城市叫人扫兴。到处破破烂烂，那些个清真寺，那些拖拖拉拉的宽大袍子和踢踢蹋蹋的鞋子什么的──我说到哪儿了？”
    “你正说到约翰逊先生来迎接你。”
    “正是。他还送我登上一艘去士麦那的法国邮船，我的女婿在码头等我。要是他知道这里发生的事，他会说些什么呢？我的女儿说这是条唯一最安全、最方便的路线。‘你只消在房里这么坐着。’她说，‘转眼就到巴黎，去美国的船就在那儿等你。’可是，亲爱的，要是误了船，我该怎么办？我得让他们知道，可我没法与他们联系，实在太可怕了。”
    哈伯德太太双眼又渗出泪珠儿来。
    “太太，你受惊了，让列车员送点茶和饼干过来。”
    “我可不知道这样就可以吃茶。”哈伯德太太泪汪汪地说，“这可是更合英国习惯。”
    “那么，太太，就来点咖啡吧。你得喝些提神的东西。”
    “那些个法国白兰地可把我害苦了。我想，还是咖啡好。”
    “好极了，你的体力会恢复过来的。”
    “我的？多好笑的说法。”
    “太太，首先，我有点小小公事麻烦你。你可答应让我们看看你的行李？”
    “为的哪桩？”
    “我们准备搜查旅客的行李。不过我不想使你感到不愉快。可是，别忘了，你的手提包。”
    “老天爷！请你们还是别提的好！我再也受不了这类打击了！”
    检查工作很快就结束了。哈伯德太太的行李只一点点──一只帽盒，一只便宜的手提箱，还有一只塞得满满的旅行袋。里面装的东西简简单单，一目了然。要不是哈伯德太太坚持要我们仔细看一下“我的女儿”和两个够丑的孩子──“我女儿的孩子，他们不可爱吗？”──的照片，检查工作给耽搁了一会，否则还要不了两分钟哩。
15 THE EVIDENCE OF THE PASSENGERS’ LUGGAGE
15 THE EVIDENCE OF THE PASSENGERS’ LUGGAGE
Having delivered himself of various polite insincerities, and having told Mrs. Hubbard that he would order coffee to be brought to her, Poirot was able to take his leave accompanied by his two friends.
“Well, we have made a start and drawn, a blank,” observed M. Bouc. “Whom shall we attack next?”
“It would be simplest, I think, just to proceed along the train, carriage by carriage. That means that we start with No. 16—the amiable Mr. Hardman.”
Mr. Hardman, who was smoking a cigar, welcomed them affably.
“Come right in, gentlemen. That is, if it’s humanly possible. It’s just a mite cramped in here for a party.”
M. Bouc explained the object of their visit, and the big detective nodded comprehendingly.
“That’s O.K. To tell the truth I’ve been wondering you didn’t get down to it sooner. Here are my keys, gentlemen, and if you like to search my pockets too, why, you’re welcome. Shall I reach the grips down for you?”
“The conductor will do that. Michel!”
The contents of Mr. Hardman’s two “grips” were soon examined and passed. They contained, perhaps, an undue proportion of spirituous liquor. Mr. Hardman winked.
“It’s not often they search your grips at the frontiers—not if you fix the conductor. I handed out a wad of Turkish notes right away, and there’s been no trouble so far.”
“And at Paris?”
Mr. Hardman winked again. “By the time I get to Paris,” he said, “what’s left over of this little lot will go into a bottle labelled hairwash.”
“You are not a believer in Prohibition, Monsieur Hardman,” said M. Bouc with a smile.
“Well,” said Hardman, “I can’t say Prohibition has ever worried me any.”
“Ah!” said M. Bouc. “The speakeasy.” He pronounced the word with care, savouring it. “Your American terms are so quaint, so expressive,” he said.
“Me, I would much like to go to America,” said Poirot.
“You’d learn a few go-ahead methods over there,” said Hardman. “Europe needs waking up. She’s half asleep.”
“It is true that America is the country of progress,” agreed Poirot. “There is much that I admire about Americans. Only—I am perhaps old-fashioned—but me, I find the American women less charming than my own countrywomen. The French or the Belgian girl, coquettish, charming—I think there is no one to touch her.”
Hardman turned away to peer out at the snow for a minute.
“Perhaps you’re right, M. Poirot,” he said. “But I guess every nation likes its own girls best.” He blinked as though the snow hurt his eyes.
“Kind of dazzling, isn’t it?” he remarked. “Say, gentlemen, this business is getting on my nerves. Murder and the snow and all. And nothing doing. Just hanging about and killing time. I’d like to get busy after someone or something.”
“The true Western spirit of hustle,” said Poirot with a smile.
The conductor replaced the bags and they moved on to the next compartment. Colonel Arbuthnot was sitting in a corner smoking a pipe and reading a magazine.
Poirot explained their errand. The Colonel made no demur. He had two heavy leather suitcases.
“The rest of my kit has gone by long sea,” he explained.
Like most Army men the Colonel was a neat packer. The examination of his baggage took only a few minutes. Poirot noted a packet of pipe-cleaners.
“You always use the same kind?” he asked. “Usually. If I can get ’em.”
“Ah!” Poirot nodded. These pipe-cleaners corresponded exactly with the one he had found on the floor of the dead man’s compartment.
Dr. Constantine remarked as much when they were out in the corridor again.
“Tout de même,” murmured Poirot, “I can hardly believe it. It is not dans son caractère, and when you have said that, you have said everything.”
The door of the next compartment was closed. It was that occupied by Princess Dragomiroff. They knocked on the door and the Princess’s deep voice called “Entrez!”
M. Bouc was spokesman. He was very deferential and polite as he explained their errand.
The Princess listened to him in silence, her small toad-like face quite impassive.
“If it is necessary, Messieurs,” she said quietly when he had finished, “that is all there is to it. My maid has the keys. She will attend to it with you.”
“Does your maid always carry your keys, Madame?” asked Poirot.
“Certainly, Monsieur.”
“And if, during the night at one of the frontiers, the customs officials should require a piece of luggage to be opened?”
The old lady shrugged her shoulders. “It is very unlikely. But in such a case, the conductor would fetch her.”
“You trust her, then, implicitly, Madame?”
“I have told you so already,” said the Princess quietly. “I do not employ people whom I do not trust.”
“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “Trust is indeed something in these days. It is perhaps better to have a homely woman whom one can trust than a more chic maid—for example, some smart Parisienne.”
He saw the dark intelligent eyes come slowly round and fasten themselves upon his face. “What exactly are you implying, M. Poirot?”
“Nothing, Madame. I? Nothing.”
“But yes. You think, do you not, that I should have a smart Frenchwoman to attend to my toilet?”
“It would be perhaps more usual, Madame.” She shook her head. “Schmidt is devoted to me.” Her voice dwelt lingeringly on the words. “Devotion—c’est impayable.”
The German woman had arrived with the keys. The Princess spoke to her in her own language, telling her to open the valises and help the gentlemen in their search. She herself remained in the corridor looking out at the snow, and Poirot remained with her, leaving M. Bouc to the task of searching the luggage.
She regarded him with a grim smile.
“Well, Monsieur, do you not wish to see what my valises contain?”
He shook his head. “Madame, it is a formality, that is all.”
“Are you so sure?”
“In your case, yes.”
“And yet I knew and loved Sonia Armstrong. What do you think, then? That I would not soil my hands with killing such canaille as that man Cassetti? Well, perhaps you are right.”
She was silent a minute or two. Then she said:
“With such a man as that, do you know what I should have liked to do? I should have liked to call to my servants: ‘Flog this man to death and fling him out on the rubbish heap!’ That is the way things were done when I was young, Monsieur.”
Still he did not speak, just listened attentively.
She looked at him with a sudden impetuosity. “You do not say anything, M. Poirot. What is it that you are thinking, I wonder?”
He looked at her with a very direct glance. “I think, Madame, that your strength is in your will—not in your arm.”
She glanced down at her thin, black-clad arms ending in those claw-like yellow hands with the rings on the fingers.
“It is true,” she said. “I have no strength in these—none. I do not know whether I am sorry or glad.”
Then she turned abruptly back towards her carriage where the maid was busily packing up the cases.
The Princess cut short M. Bouc’s apologies.
“There is no need for you to apologise, Monsieur,” she said. “A murder has been committed. Certain actions have to be performed. That is all there is to it.”
“Vous êtes bien aimable, Madame.”
She inclined her head slightly as they departed.
The doors of the next two carriages were shut. M. Bouc paused and scratched his head.
“Diable!” he said. “This may be awkward. These are diplomatic passports. Their luggage is exempt.”
“From customs examination, yes. But a murder is different.”
“I know. All the same—we do not want to have complications.”
“Do not distress yourself, my friend. The Count and Countess will be reasonable. See how amiable Princess Dragomiroff was about it.”
“She is truly grande dame. These two are also of the same position, but the Count impressed me as a man of somewhat truculent disposition. He was not pleased when you insisted on questioning his wife. And this will annoy him still further. Suppose—eh?—we omit them. After all, they can have nothing to do with the matter. Why should I stir up needless trouble for myself?”
“I do not agree with you,” said Poirot. “I feel sure that Count Andrenyi will be reasonable. At any rate let us make the attempt.”
And before M. Bouc could reply, he rapped sharply on the door of No. 13.
A voice from within cried “Entrez!”
The Count was sitting in the corner near the door reading a newspaper. The Countess was curled up in the opposite corner near the window. There was a pillow behind her head and she seemed to have been asleep.
“Pardon, Monsieur le Comte,” began Poirot. “pray forgive this intrusion. It is that we are making a search of all the baggage on the train. In most cases a mere formality. But it has to be done. M. Bouc suggests that, as you have a diplomatic passport, you might reasonably claim to be exempt from such a search.”
The Count considered for a moment.
“Thank you,” he said. “But I do not think that I care to have an exception made in my case. I should prefer that our baggage should be examined like that of the other passengers.”
He turned to his wife. “You do not object, I hope, Elena?”
“Not at all,” said the Countess without hesitation.
A rapid and somewhat perfunctory search followed. Poirot seemed to be trying to mask an embarrassment by making various small pointless remarks, such as:
“Here is a label all wet on your suitcase, Madame,” as he lifted down a blue morocco case with initials on it and a coronet.
The Countess did not reply to this observation. She seemed, indeed, rather bored by the whole proceeding, remaining curled up in her corner and staring dreamily out through the window whilst the men searched her luggage in the compartment next door.
Poirot finished his search by opening the little cupboard above the washbasin and taking a rapid glance at its contents—a sponge, face cream, powder and a small bottle labelled trional.
Then with polite remarks on either side, the search party withdrew.
Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment, that of the dead man, and Poirot’s own came next.
They now came to the second-class carriages. The first one, Nos. 10 and 11, was occupied by Mary Debenham, who was reading a book, and Greta Ohlsson, who was fast asleep but woke with a start at their entrance.
Poirot repeated his formula. The Swedish lady seemed agitated, Mary Debenham calmly indifferent. He addressed himself to the Swedish lady.
“If you permit, Mademoiselle, we will examine your baggage first, and then perhaps you would be so good as to see how the American lady is getting on. We have moved her into one of the carriages in the next coach, but she is still very much upset as the result of her discovery. I have ordered coffee to be sent to her, but I think she is of those to whom someone to talk to is a necessity of the first order.”
The good lady was instantly sympathetic. She would go immediately. It must have been indeed a terrible shock to the nerves, and already the poor lady was upset by the journey and leaving her daughter. Ah, yes, certainly she would go at once—her case was not locked—and she would take with her some sal ammoniac.
She bustled off. Her possessions were soon examined. They were meagre in the extreme. She had evidently not yet noticed the missing wires from the hat-box.
Miss Debenham had put her book down. She was watching Poirot. When he asked her, she handed over her keys. Then, as he lifted down a case and opened it, she said:
“Why did you send her away, M. Poirot?”
“I, Mademoiselle! Why, to minister to the American lady.”
“An excellent pretext—but a pretext all the same.”
“I don’t understand you, Mademoiselle.”
“I think you understand me very well.” She smiled. “You wanted to get me alone. Wasn’t that it?”
“You are putting words into my mouth, Mademoiselle.”
“And ideas into your head? No, I don’t think so. The ideas are already there. That is right, isn’t it?”
“Mademoiselle, we have a proverb—”
“Qui s’excuse s’accuse—is that what you were going to say? You must give me the credit for a certain amount of observation and common sense. For some reason or other you have got it into your head that I know something about this sordid business—this murder of a man I never saw before.”
“You are imagining things, Mademoiselle.”
“No, I am not imagining things at all. But it seems to me that a lot of time is wasted by not speaking the truth—by beating about the bush instead of coming straight out with things.”
“And you do not like the waste of time. No, you like to come straight to the point. You like the direct method. Eh bien, I will give it to you, the direct method. I will ask you the meaning of certain words that I overheard on the journey from Syria. I had got out of the train to do what the English call ‘stretch the legs’ at the station of Konya. Your voice and the Colonel’s, Mademoiselle, they came to me out of the night. You said to him, ‘Not now. Not now. When it’s all over. When it’s behind us.’ What did you mean by those words, Mademoiselle?”
She asked very quietly, “Do you think I meant—murder?”
“It is I who am asking you, Mademoiselle.”
She sighed—was lost a minute in thought. Then, as though rousing herself, she said:
“Those words had a meaning, Monsieur, but not one that I can tell you. I can only give you my solemn word of honour that I had never set eyes on this man Ratchett in my life until I saw him on this train.”
“And—you refuse to explain those words?”
“Yes, if you like to put it that way—I refuse. They had to do with—with a task I had undertaken.”
“A task that is now ended?”
“What do you mean?”
“It is ended, is it not?”
“Why should you think so?”
“Listen, Mademoiselle, I will recall to you another incident. There was a delay to the train on the day we were to reach Stamboul. You were very agitated, Mademoiselle. You, so calm, so self-controlled. You lost that calm.”
“I did not want to miss my connection.”
“So you said. But, Mademoiselle, the Orient Express leaves Stamboul every day of the week. Even if you had missed the connection it would only have been a matter of twenty-four hours’ delay.”
Miss Debenham for the first time showed signs of losing her temper.
“You do not seem to realise that one may have friends awaiting one’s arrival in London, and that a day’s delay upsets arrangements and causes a lot of annoyance.”
“Ah, it is like that? There are friends awaiting your arrival? You do not want to cause them inconvenience?”
“Naturally.”
“And yet—it is curious—”
“What is curious?”
“On this train—again we have a delay. And this time a more serious delay, since there is no possibility of sending a telegram to your friends or of getting them on the long—the long—”
“Long distance? The telephone, you mean.”
“Ah, yes, the portmanteau call, as you say in England.”
Mary Debenham smiled a little in spite of herself. “Trunk call,” she corrected. “Yes, as you say, it is extremely annoying not to be able to get any word through, either by telephone or by telegraph.”
“And yet, Mademoiselle, this time your manner is quite different. You no longer betray the impatience. You are calm and philosophical.”
Mary Debenham flushed and bit her lip. She no longer felt inclined to smile.
“You do not answer, Mademoiselle?”
“I am sorry. I did not know that there was anything to answer.”
“Your change of attitude, Mademoiselle.”
“Don’t you think that you are making rather a fuss about nothing, M. Poirot?”
Poirot spread out his hands in an apologetic gesture.
“It is perhaps a fault with us detectives. We expect the behaviour to be always consistent. We do not allow for changes of mood.”
Mary Debenham made no reply.
“You know Colonel Arbuthnot well, Mademoiselle?”
He fancied that she was relieved by the change of subject.
“I met him for the first time on this journey.”
“Have you any reason to suspect that he may have known this man Ratchett?”
She shook her head decisively. “I am quite sure he didn’t.”
“Why are you sure?”
“By the way he spoke.”
“And yet, Mademoiselle, we found a pipe-cleaner on the floor of the dead man’s compartment. And Colonel Arbuthnot is the only man on the train who smokes a pipe.”
He watched her narrowly, but she displayed neither surprise nor emotion, merely said:
“Nonsense. It’s absurd. Colonel Arbuthnot is the last man in the world to be mixed up in a crime—especially a theatrical kind of crime like this.”
It was so much what Poirot himself thought that he found himself on the point of agreeing with her. He said instead:
“I must remind you that you do not know him very well, Mademoiselle.”
She shrugged her shoulders. “I know the type well enough.”
He said very gently:
“You still refuse to tell me the meaning of those words: ‘When it’s behind us’?”
She replied coldly, “I have nothing more to say.”
“It does not matter,” said Hercule Poirot. “I shall find out.”
He bowed and left the compartment, closing the door after him.
“Was that wise, my friend?” asked M. Bouc. “You have put her on her guard—and through her, you have put the Colonel on his guard also.”
“Mon ami, if you wish to catch a rabbit you put a ferret into the hole, and if the rabbit is there—he runs. That is all I have done.”
They entered the compartment of Hildegarde Schmidt.
The woman was standing in readiness, her face respectful but unemotional.
Poirot took a quick glance through the contents of the small case on the seat. Then he motioned to the attendant to get down the bigger suitcase from the rack.
“The keys?” he said.
“It is not locked, Monsieur.”
Poirot undid the hasps and lifted the lid.
“Aha!” he said, and turning to M. Bouc, “You remember what I said? Look here a little moment!”
On the top of the suitcase was a hastily rolled-up brown Wagon Lit uniform.
The stolidity of the German woman underwent a sudden change.
“Ach!” she cried. “That is not mine. I did not put it there. I have never looked in that case since we left Stamboul. Indeed, indeed, it is true!” She looked from one to another of the men pleadingly.
Poirot took her gently by the arm and soothed her.
“No, no, all is well. We believe you. Do not be agitated. I am sure you did not hide the uniform there as I am sure that you are a good cook. See. You are a good cook, are you not?”
Bewildered, the woman smiled in spite of herself, “Yes, indeed, all my ladies have said so. I—”
She stopped, her mouth open, looking frightened again.
“No, no,” said Poirot. “I assure you all is well. See, I will tell you how this happened. This man, the man you saw in Wagon Lit uniform, comes out of the dead man’s compartment. He collides with you. That is bad luck for him. He has hoped that no one will see him. What to do next? He must get rid of his uniform. It is now not a safeguard, but a danger.”
His glance went to M. Bow and Dr. Constantine, who were listening attentively.
“There is the snow, you see. The snow which confuses all his plans. Where can he hide these clothes? All the compartments are full. No, he passes one whose door is open, showing it to be unoccupied. It must be the one belonging to the woman with whom he has just collided. He slips in, removes the uniform and jams it hurriedly into a suitcase on the rack. It may be some time before it is discovered.”
“And then?” said M. Bouc.
“That we must discuss,” Poirot said with a warning glance.
He held up the tunic. A button, the third down, was missing. Poirot slipped his hand into the pocket and took out a conductor’s pass-key, used to unlock the doors of the compartments.
“Here is the explanation of how one man was able to pass through locked doors,” said M. Bouc. “Your questions to Mrs. Hubbard were unnecessary. Locked or not locked, the man could easily get through the communicating door. After all, if a Wagon Lit uniform, why not a Wagon Lit key?”
“Why not indeed?” returned Poirot.
“We might have known it, really. You remember that Michel said that the door into the corridor of Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment was locked when he came in answer to her bell.”
“That is so, Monsieur,” said the conductor. “That is why I thought the lady must have been dreaming.”
“But now it is easy,” continued M. Bouc. “Doubtless he meant to relock the communicating door, also, but perhaps he heard some movement from the bed and it startled him.”
“We have now,” said Poirot, “only to find the scarlet kimono.”
“True. And these last two compartments are occupied by men.”
“We will search all the same.”
“Oh! assuredly. Besides, I remember what you said.”
Hector MacQueen acquiesced willingly in the search. “I’d just as soon you did,” he said with a rueful smile. “I feel I’m definitely the most suspicious character on the train. You’ve only got to find a will in which the old man left me all his money, and that’ll just about fix things.”
M. Bouc bent a suspicious glance upon him.
“That’s only my fun,” added MacQueen hastily. “He’d never have left me a cent, really. I was just useful to him—languages and so on. You’re likely to be out of luck, you know, if you don’t speak anything but good American. I’m no linguist myself, but I know what I call Shopping and Hotel—snappy bits in French and German and Italian.”
His voice was a little louder than usual. It was as though he were slightly uneasy over the search in spite of his expressed willingness.
Poirot emerged. “Nothing,” he said. “Not even a compromising bequest!”
MacQueen sighed. “Well, that’s a load off my mind,” he said humorously.
They moved on to the last compartment. The examination of the luggage of the big Italian and of the valet yielded no result.
The three men stood at the end of the coach looking at each other.
“What next?” said M. Bouc.
“We will go back to the dining-car,” said Poirot. “We know now all that we can know. We have the evidence of the passengers, the evidence of their baggage, the evidence of our eyes. ... We can expect no further help. It must be our part now to use our brains.”
He felt in his pocket for his cigarette case. It was empty.
“I will join you in a moment,” he said. “I shall need the cigarettes. This is a very difficult, a very curious, affair. Who wore that scarlet kimono? Where is it now? I wish I knew. There is something in this case—some factor—that escapes me! It is difficult because it has been made difficult. But we will discuss it. Pardon me a moment.”
He went hurriedly along the corridor to his own compartment. He had, he knew, a further supply of cigarettes in one of his valises.
He got it down and snapped back the lock.
Then he sat back on his heels and stared.
Neatly folded on the top of the case was a thin scarlet silk kimono embroidered with dragons.
“So,” he murmured. “It is like that. A defiance. Very well, I take it up.”
第十五章　旅客的行李
第十五章　旅客的行李  
    波洛说了不少的客气话，告诉哈伯德太太，他这就唤列车员把咖啡送来，然后才在两个朋友的陪同下，离开哈伯德太太新换的包房。
    “瞧，我们一开头就扑个空。”鲍克先生说，“下一个要查谁的？”
    “我看，最简便的办法不如沿过道一个包房挨一个包房查，也就是说从十六号──从好性子的哈特曼先生开始。”
    哈特曼抽着雪茄烟，和和气气地欢迎他们。
    “进来吧，诸位先生──也就是说，你们认为可以的话。这地方要来个聚会，就是窄了点。”
    鲍克先生说明来意，高大的侦探会意地点点头。
    “好嘛，说实在的，我正犯疑，你们怎么不马来这一下。先生们，这些是我的钥匙，要是也想搜我的腰包，欢迎。要不要把提包给诸位拿下来？”
    “列车员会来拿的。米歇尔！”
    哈特曼先生的两只施行包很快就查完了，里面有几瓶禁酒。哈特曼先生见了眨眨眼睛。
    “国境上他们不常来查旅行包──要是买通列车员，他们是不会来查的。我塞过去一大把土耳其钞票，麻烦事就少了。”
    “巴黎呢？”
    哈特曼又眨眨眼。
    “我一到巴黎，”他说，“剩下的一点点就可倒进贴着洗发剂的商标的瓶里去了。”
    “你倒不怕禁令，哈特曼先生。”鲍克先生笑着说。
    “是嘛，”哈特曼说，“可以说，禁令是难不倒我的。”
    “啊！”鲍克先生说，“非法酒店。”他说得小心翼翼，象是品着它的滋味。
    “你的美国话真棒，说得有声有色。他说。
    “啊，我倒很想去去美国。”波洛说。
    “你得学点那边的先进办法。”哈特曼说，“欧洲要醒醒了，眼下还在瞌睡朦胧。”
    “这话不假，美国是个先进国家，”波洛表示赞同。“我对美国十分钦佩。只是──也许我是个老派人──我这人觉得美国女人不如我们的女同胞迷人。法国或比利时姑娘，风流俊俏──我想，谁也比不上。”
    哈特曼转过身对窗外的雪景望起来。
    “也许，你这话有道理，波洛先生。”他说，“但是，我想，每个国家的人都更喜欢自己国家的姑娘。”
    他眨了眨眼睛，仿佛是雪刺伤了他的眼睛。
    “使人头昏眼花，是不是？”他说：“先生们，这案子够叫人心烦。谋杀和白雪，一切的一切，一事无成。只是东游西荡，浪费时间。我倒愿意跟着别人做点什么。”
    “标准的西方人的干劲。”波洛笑着说。
    列车员把袋子放回原处，他们转到隔壁包房去。阿巴思诺特上校正坐在角落里，嘴叼着烟斗，在看杂志。
    波洛说明了他们的使命。上校不表示反对。他有两只很沉的皮箱。
    “其余的行李都托船运走了。”他解释道。象大多数军人那样，上校的东西收拾得有条有理，只用了几分钟便搜查完了。波洛注意到一包烟斗的通条。
    “你常用这玩意儿？”
    “常用，只要搞得到。”
    “唔。”波洛点点头。
    这种烟斗通条和在死者包房地板上捡到的一模一样。
    在过道上康斯坦丁大夫念念不忘这件事。
    “嗯，”波洛咕噜道。“令人难以置信。这可不合他的性格。既然说了，就得说个明白。”
    下一个包房的门关着。房主人是德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人。他们主人是德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，他们敲敲门，公爵夫人深沉的声音应道：“进来。”
    首先说话的是鲍克先生。他恭恭敬敬，彬彬有礼地说明来意。
    公爵夫人默默听着。她那小小的癞蟆脸毫无表情。
    “要是有必要，先生们。”等他们把话说完，她平静地说，“东西全在这里，钥匙在佣人身边，她会帮你们的。”
    “钥匙向来由佣人拿着的，夫人？”波洛问。
    “自然，先生。”
    “要是某一晚，边境海关人员要把你的行李打开检查呢？”
    老太太耸耸肩。
    “不太可能吧。即使有这种情况，列车员会把她找来的。”
    “太太，如此说来，无疑你是信得过她了？”
    “不错，”波洛若有所思地说，“这年头信任确实是顶要紧的。也许用一个信得过的普通女佣人比用一个时髦的──比如说，机灵的巴黎女人强。”
    他看到那对乌黑的，聪明的眼睛慢慢地转动，紧紧盯着他的脸。
    “波洛先生，你到底是什么意思？”
    “没什么，夫人。我吗？没什么。”
    “我看不象。你以为，我非得有一个机灵的巴黎女人陪我上厕所不成？”
    “夫人，这是常有的事。”
    她摇摇头。
    “施密特对我一片忠心，”她把这句话拖得很长。“忠心──这是无价之宝。”
    德国女人带着钥匙进来了。公爵夫人用法语告诉她把旅行袋打开，帮助先生们搜查。她自己则在门外过道里观赏雪景，波洛撇下鲍克先生让他执行搜查行李的任务，自己遇跟她到了过道。
    她对他惨然一笑。
    “那么，先生，你不想看看我的旅行袋里装的是什么东西？”
    他摇摇头。
    “夫人，例行公事，仅此而已。”
    “你是这样看的？”
    “对你来说，是这样。”
    “你说到索妮娅•阿姆斯特朗，我了解她也爱她。那么，你的意思呢？我不会谋杀凯赛梯这类坏蛋来弄脏自己的双手，是吧？是的，也许你是对的。”
    她沉默了一两分钟，接着说：“你可知道，我宁愿用什么办法对付这类人？我宁愿把所有佣人召进来，对他们说：‘揍死他，然后把他扔到垃圾堆里去。’先生，我年轻时，用的就是这办法。”
    他还是一言不发，只是聚精会神地听着。
    忽然，她以一种急不可耐的目光打量他。
    “波洛先生，你一声不吭。我倒不知道，你在想些什么？”
    他直率地看着她。
    “我想，夫人，你的力量在于你的意志，而不是你的双臂。”
    她低下头打量了自己那瘦小，黝黑的双臂，那指上戴着戒指，鹰爪般的黄手。
    “这话很对。”她说：“我的双手没有力气──一点也没有。我不知道是喜还是悲。”
    蓦地，她转过身回房去。女佣人正在忙碌地整理箱子。
    公爵夫人打断鲍克先生的道歉。
    “先生，用不着道歉。既发生谋杀案，采取一定的行动是免不了的。东西全在这里。”
    “你真好，夫人。”
    当他们离开时，她微微偏了偏头。
    下面两个包房的让是关着的。鲍克先生停下脚步，搔着头。
    “见鬼！”他说，“棘手的事儿，他们用的是外交护照，行李是免查的。”
    “海关不用查，谋杀案可是两码事。”
    “这我知道。反正──我们不想使事情复杂他。”
    “别担心，朋友。伯爵夫妇都是通情达理的人，看看和蔼可亲的德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人是怎么看待这个问题的？”
    “她是个贵妇人。这一对也是有身份的人，可是伯爵那模样很凶，上次你坚持要询问他的妻子，他很不高兴，这次必定又生更大的气了。如果说──唔，我们还是免了他们，怎么样？反正他们不会跟这种事有瓜葛的。我们干吗找些不必要的麻烦？”
    “我不同意。”波洛说，“可以肯定，安德烈伯爵是通情达理的。至少我们也得试试。”
    不等鲍克先生回答，他就狠狠地敲了敲十三号的门。
    房里有人答道：“进来。”
    伯爵坐在门旁的角落里看报，伯爵夫人蜷缩在对面近窗的角落，头底下塞个枕头。她仿佛刚睡过。“对不起，伯爵阁下。”波洛先开口，“请原谅，打扰了。我们在搜查车上旅客的行李，大多数情况下，这只是例行公事。可是不做又不行。鲍克先生提醒我，阁下持的是外交护照，有理由申明免受检查。”
    伯爵思索了一会。
    “谢谢，”他说，“不过，我认为，并不需要这类照顾。我怀愿跟其他旅客一样，把行李拿出去搜查。”
    他转身对他的妻子。
    “我想，你不会反对吧，爱琳娜？”
    “不会的。”伯爵夫人毫不犹豫。
    搜查进行得仓促、草率。波洛似乎竭力提些不着边际的小问题来掩盖这一窘境，例如：
    “夫人，你的箱子上的标签全湿了。”他拿下一只摩洛哥箱子，上面贴着缩写字和王冠的标志。
    伯爵夫人对此没有回答。看来，她是被这些事弄得心烦意乱了，她还是躺在角落里，睡意朦胧地看着窗外。这时波洛正在搜查另一个包房的行李。
    搜查工作快要结束时，波洛打开盥洗池上的小柜，匆匆地朝里面的东西扫一眼──一块海绵，面油，香粉还有一个巾着台俄那的小瓶子。
    最后，双方很有礼貌地说了几句话，三人搜查人员转身告辞。
    接着，便是哈伯太太的、死者的及波洛的包房。
    他们来到二等车。第一个包房是１０号和１１号。房主人是德贝汉小姐和格莱达•奥尔逊。前者在看书，后者睡着了，但他们一进来便惊醒过来。
    波洛重复他的话。瑞典太太象是局促不安，德贝汉小姐冷冷淡淡，漠不关心。
    “太太，允许的话，我们要查查你的行李，然后也许费心过去看看哈伯德太太。我们让她搬到另一节车厢去了，不过自从发现那把刀至今，她还是心烦意乱的，我吩咐让人给她送些咖啡去，可是，我认为眼下顶要紧的是，找个伴儿跟她聊聊。”
    她心肠的太太同情心一触即发。她立刻就去找美国太太聊聊。她的神经怕是受到极大的刺激，这一趟旅行早已搅得这个可怜的老太太心绪不安，何况还要久离自己的女儿。啊，是的，她这就去──箱子反正没锁──她要给她带点氯化铵去。
    她拔腿就走。她的财物很快就检查完毕。她带的东西少得可怜。显然，她还没有发现自己的帽盒里少了几只金属网罩。
    德贝汉小姐放下书，注意着波洛的一举一动。当他问她时，才把钥匙递过去，看他拿下箱子，打开来，她说：“你为什么打发她走，波洛先生？”
    “我吗，小姐？让她照料美国老太太去。”
    “说得多动听──借口而已。”
    “小姐，我不理解你的意思。”
    “我认为，你完全理解。”
    她微微一笑。
    “你想留我一个人单独呆着，是吗？”
    “除非你硬要我这么说。”
    “还说硬要你这么说？不，我不承认。你早有这个主意了，对不对？”
    “小姐，我们有句古话──”
    “做贼心虚。你来就为了这话？你应该相信我还有点儿观察力和常识。由于某些原因，你认为我对这件可悲的案件是知情的──一个我素不相识的人的死。”
    “小姐，这是你的想象。”
    “不，根本不是我的想象。我认为，不说真话，浪费了许多时间──说话不直截了当，而是转弯抹角，躲躲闪闪。”
    “你也不喜欢浪费时间，很她。那我就照着办：直接法。我要问你，我在叙利亚的车上听到的几句话是什么意思？我曾在康尼雅站下车去，你们英国人称之为活动手脚，小姐，夜里你和上校的声音传到我的耳朵里，你跟他说：‘现在不行，现在不行。等事情全部结束，等那事情过去之后。’小姐，这几句话是什么意思？”
    她非常平静的说：“你可认为我这是指──谋杀？”
    “小姐，是我有问你。”
    她叹了一口气──沉思片刻，然后象是苏醒过来似的，说道：“先生，这话是有所指的，不过不是由我来说，我可以庄严地以名誉担保，这以前我从未亲眼见过这个叫雷切特的人。”
    “如此说来──你拒绝解释？”
    “是的，如果你这样理解──我拒绝。这是跟，跟我所承担的任务有关。”
    “一个已完成的任务？”
    “你这是什么意思？”
    “完成了，还是没有完成？”
    “你干吗要这样想呢？”
    “小姐，听着，我要提醒你另一件事。快到伊斯坦布尔那天，火车出了点小毛病，你焦急不安。小姐，你是个何等冷静，自制力又很强的人，可你失去了冷静。”
    “我不想误了我的下一趟车。”
    “这是你的说法。可是小姐，东方快车本周每天都有，即使误了一班车，只不过误了二十四小时。”
    德贝汉小姐第一次露出要生气的样子。
    “你根本不知道人家有朋友在伦敦等着，误了一天就会失约了，这要使人多着急。”
    “哦，是这样吗？朋友等你，你不愿使他们等着急？”
    “那还用说。”
    “可是，奇怪的是──”
    “有什么奇怪？”
    “这趟车，我们又耽误了。而这次情况更严重，因为你不可能给朋友发个电报，或通个长──长──”
    “唔，正是。你你英国人管它叫多有电话。”
    玛丽•德贝汉小姐不由自主地微微笑了起来。
    “干线电话。”她纠正道，“正象你所说的，双方既不能通电话，也不能拍电报，实在令人焦急。”
    “可是，小姐，这一次你的态度可大相同。你上点也不着急。你镇镇自若，沉着从容。”
    玛丽•德贝汉咬着嘴唇，脸窘得通红，她再也笑不起来了。
    “小姐，你可没有回答我的问题，是不是。”
    “很遗憾，我可不知道，还有什么需要回答的。”
    “说明一下你前后神态变化的原因，小姐。”
    “你不觉得这简直是鸡蛋里挑骨头吗，波洛先生？”
    波洛推开双手，做了个歉意的姿势。
    “这或许是我们铸侦探的弱点。我们总指望一个人的态度始终如一，我们容不得情绪变化无常。”
    玛丽•德贝汉没有回答。
    “小姐，你对阿巴思诺特上校很了解？”
    他设想，话题这么一转，她要平静下来的。
    “这次旅行我第一次遇见他。”
    “你是不是有理由怀疑，他可能认识雷切特？”
    她断然地摇摇头。
    “可以肯定，他不认识他。”
    “有什么根据可以这样肯定？”
    “从他说的话里。”
    “可是，小姐，我们在死者的包房的地板上捡到一根烟斗通条。而阿巴思诺特上校是唯一用烟斗的人。”
    他紧紧地盯着她。可是她显得既不惊讶，也不激动，只是说：“没有的事。荒谬之极。
阿巴思诺特上校是世上最不会跟谋杀沾边的人──尤其是这种戏剧性的谋杀案。”
    这种观点和波洛的想法多么的合拍，但是他嘴里却说：“我得提醒你，小姐，你对他并不十分了解。”
    她耸了耸肩。
    “对这类型的人我有足够的了解。”
    他非常柔和地说：“你还是不愿告诉我‘等那事过去之后’这些话的含义吗？”
    她冷冷地答道：“我再没什么可说的。”
    “那也没什么。”波洛说，“反正我会知道的。”
    他鞠了个躬，随手带上门，离开了包房。
    “朋友，这明智吗？”鲍克先生问，“你这是促使她提防我们──通过她也使上校警惕起来。”
    “朋友，你想要逮兔子，就要往洞里放只雪貂；如有兔子，就会跑动。我用的就是这个办法。”
    他们进了希尔德加德•施密特的包房。
    这女人早就作好一切准备，站着。她毕恭毕敬，脸上却冷冰冰的毫无表情。
    波洛对放在座位上的小箱子里装的东西匆匆地扫了一眼。然后他招列车员从行李架上搬下另一只较大的箱子。
    “钥匙呢？”他问。
    “没锁，先生。”
    波洛打开搭扣，掀起箱盖。
    “啊哈！”他转身对鲍克先生说，“可记得我说过话？往这里瞧一瞧！”
    箱子上层摆着一件匆促卷起来的褐色的列车员的制服。
    德国女人那呆板的表情霎时大大改了样。
    “啊！”她嚷起来，“这可不是我。我没放过。打从一离开伊斯坦布尔，我就没留意过这只箱子。”
    她哀求地轮番打量着三个人。
    波洛温柔地拉起她的手，安慰她。
    “不，没事儿，我们信得过你，别着急，我们满有把握你没藏过制服，正象我们相信你是个好厨师，你是个她厨师，是不是？”
    这女人迷惑不解，不由得笑了起来。
    “真的，我的女主人全都这么说。我”
    她张开嘴，却没有再往下说，又显出一副吓坏了的样子。
    “不，不，”波洛说，“肯定你没事。听着，究竟是怎么一回事，我这就告诉你。那个男人，你见到的那个穿制服的男人，从死者的包房里走出来，他跟你撞了个满怀，这算他倒运了。他原以为见不到人的。下一步怎么办？这件制服得脱手，这下不再是预防措施，而是危险临头了。”
    他回过头来，看了鲍克先生和康斯坦丁大夫一眼，他们都在聚精会神地听着。
    “你知道，外面下雪，这场雪打乱了他的全盘计划。这制服往哪里塞呢？车上的包房住满了人。不，他经过一个包房，门开着，他以为那儿没人。这包房想必是跟他相撞的那个女人住的，他溜了进去，脱下衣服，匆忙塞到行李架上的一只箱子里。要找到它，也许还得一些时间。”
    “后来呢？”鲍克先生问。
    “那倒需要研究了。”波洛说，使了个警告的眼色。
    他拎起制服，第三颗钮扣没了。波洛把手伸进衣袋，掏出一把列车员的可以打开所有包房的万能钥匙。
    “这说明为什么这个人能穿过所有的包房。”鲍克先生说。“你对哈伯德太太提的问题毫无必要，锁着也罢，没锁也罢，这个人都能轻而易举进通过所有的门。总之，这既然是列车员的制服，为什么不能有一把万能钥匙呢？”
    “真的，为什么不能有呢？”波洛说。
    “说实在的，我们原来应该知道的。你可记得米歇尔说过，他听到铃声，过来时，哈伯德太太房门是锁着的。”
    “正是，先生。”列车员说。“所以我才认为，这太太该是在做梦。”
    “可是这就明白了。”鲍克先生接着说，“显然，他打算把包房的门也重新锁上，可是也许他听到床上的声响，吓了他一大跳。”
    “现在，”波洛说，“我们只需把鲜红色睡衣找出来就行了。”
    “正是，可是最后两个包房住的都是男人。”
    “男人也得查查。”
    “哦！这样保险点。此外，我又想起你刚才说的话。”
    赫克托•麦克昆对搜查默默地表示乐意。
    “我希望你们越早越好。”他苦笑了一下。说道：“我觉得，我是车上嫌疑最大的人。
你们只需找到一张遗嘱，上头写着老头儿留给我的全部金银，于是就可定案了。”
    鲍克先生怀疑地盯着他看。
    “我这是说着玩的。”麦克昆急忙说，“事实上，他不会留给我一分钱。”
    波洛插了嘴。
    “没问题，”他说，“哪怕是互让遗产。”
    麦克昆叹了一口气。
    “那就好。思想包袱放下了。”他的话富有幽默感。
    一行三人到了最后一个房间。对意大利人和男佣人的行李搜查结果，一无所获。
    三个人站在车厢尽头面面相觑。
    “下步怎么办？”鲍克先生问。
    “回餐车。”波洛说。“能了解的全部都了解了。有旅客的证词，有得李的情况，还有我们亲眼目睹的证据。看来，再不需要什么别的帮忙了。现在该是使用我们的大脑的时候了。”
    他摸摸口袋里的烟盒，空了。
    “我这就过来。”他说。“我得拿些烟。这是一件棘手的、稀奇古怪的案子。是谁穿这件鲜红色的睡衣呢？睡衣现在又在哪里呢？这案子中有些东西──一些事实──被我忽视了。案件之所以棘手，是因为作案棘手。不过我们会理出头绪来的。稍等片刻。”
    他匆匆地沿过道向自己的包房走去。他知道，他的一只箱子里还存有一些香烟。
    他拿下箱子，“啪”的一声打开锁。
    他盘着双腿坐着凝视起来。
    箱子上层摆着一件折得整整齐齐的鲜红色的丝质睡衣，上面绣着龙。
    “看来，”他自言自语道。“象是那么回事。这是挑战，好吧，我来应战。”
PART III HERCULE POIROT SITS BACK AND THINKS
PART III HERCULE POIROT SITS BACK AND THINKS

1 WHICH OF THEM?
M. Bouc. and Dr. Constantine were talking together when Poirot entered the dining-car. M. Bouc was looking depressed.
“Le voilà,” said the latter when he saw Poirot. Then he added, as his friend sat down, “If you solve this case, mon cher, I shall indeed believe in miracles!”
“It worries you, this case?”
“Naturally it worries me. I cannot make head or tail of it.”
“I agree,” said the doctor. He looked at Poirot with interest. “To be frank,” he said, “I cannot see what you are going to do next.”
“No!” said Poirot thoughtfully.
He took out his cigarette case and lit one of his tiny cigarettes. His eyes were dreamy.
“That, to me, is the interest of this case,” he said. “We are cut off from all the normal routes of procedure. Are these people whose evidence we have taken speaking the truth, or lying? We have no means of finding out—except such means as we can devise ourselves. It is an exercise, this, of the brain.”
“That is all very fine,” said M. Bouc. “But what have you to go upon?”
“I told you just now. We have the evidence of the passengers and the evidence of our own eyes.”
“Pretty evidence—that of the passengers! It told us just nothing at all.”
Poirot shook his head.
“I do not agree, my friend. The evidence of the passengers gave us several points of interest.”
“Indeed,” said M. Bouc sceptically. “I did not observe it.”
“That is because you did not listen.”
“Well, tell me, what did I miss?”
“I will just take one instance—the first evidence we heard, that of the young MacQueen. He uttered, to my mind, one very significant phrase.”
“About the letters?”
“No, not about the letters. As far as I can remember, his words were: ‘We travelled about. Mr. Ratchett wanted to see the world. He was hampered by knowing no languages. I acted more as a courier than a secretary.’ ”
He looked from the doctor’s face to that of M. Bouc.
“What? You still do not see? That is inexcusable—for you had a second chance again just now when he said, ‘You’re likely to be out of luck if you don’t speak anything but good American.’ ”
“You mean—?” M. Bouc still looked puzzled.
“Ah, it is that you want it given to you in words of one syllable. Well, here it is! M. Ratchett spoke no French. Yet, when the conductor came in answer to his bell last night, it was a voice speaking in French that told him that it was a mistake and that he was not wanted. It was, moreover, a perfectly idiomatic phrase that was used, not one that a man knowing only a few words of French would have selected. ‘Ce n’est rien Je me suis trompé.’ ”
“It is true,” cried Constantine excitedly. “We should have seen that! I remember your laying stress on the words when you repeated them to us. Now I understand your reluctance to rely upon the evidence of the dented watch. Already, at twenty-three minutes to one, Ratchett was dead—”
“And it was his murderer speaking!” finished M. Bouc impressively.
Poirot raised a deprecating hand.
“Let us not go too fast. And do not let us assume more than we actually know. It is safe, I think, to say that at that time—twenty-three minutes to one—some other person was in Ratchett’s compartment, and that that person either was French or could speak the French language fluently.”
“You are very cautious, mon vieux—”
“One should advance only a step at a time. We have no actual evidence that Ratchett was dead at that time.”
“There is the cry that awakened you.”
“Yes, that is true.”
“In one way,” said M. Bouc thoughtfully, “this discovery does not affect things very much. You heard someone moving about next door. That someone was not Ratchett, but the other man. Doubtless he is washing blood from his hands, clearing up after the crime, burning the incriminating letter. Then he waits till all is still, and, when he thinks it is safe and the coast is clear, he locks and chains Ratchett’s door on the inside, unlocks the communicating door through into Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment and slips out that way. In fact, it is exactly as we thought, with the difference that Ratchett was killed about half an hour earlier and the watch put on to a quarter past one to create an alibi.”
“Not such a famous alibi,” said Poirot. “The hands of the watch pointed to 1.15—the exact time when the intruder actually left the scene of the crime.”
“True,” said M. Bouc, a little confused. “What then does the watch convey to you?”
“If the hands were altered—I say if—then the time at which they were set must have a significance. The natural reaction would be to suspect anyone who had a reliable alibi for the time indicated—in this case, 1.15.”
“Yes, yes,” said the doctor. “That reasoning is good.”
“We must also pay a little attention to the time the intruder entered the compartment. When had he an opportunity of doing so? Unless we are to assume the complicity of the real conductor, there was only one time when he could have done so—during the time the train stopped at Vincovci. After the train left Vincovci the conductor was sitting facing the corridor, and whereas any one of the passengers would pay little attention to a Wagon Lit attendant, the one person who would notice an impostor is the real conductor. But during the halt at Vincovci the conductor is out on the platform. The coast is clear.”
“And by our former reasoning, it must be one of the passengers,” said M. Bouc. “We come back to where we were. Which of them?”
Poirot smiled.
“I have made a list,” he said. “If you like to see it, it will perhaps refresh your memory.”
The doctor and M. Bouc pored over the list together. It was written out neatly in a methodical manner in the order in which the passengers had been interviewed.
HECTOR MACQUEEN, American subject, Berth No. 6, Second Class.
Motive—Possibly arising out of association with dead man?
Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Midnight to 1.30 vouched for by Col. Arbuthnot, and 1. 15 to 2 vouched for by conductor.)Evidence against him—None.
Suspicious circumstances—None.
CONDUCTOR PIERRE MICHEL, French subject.
Motive—None.
Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Seen by H. P. in corridor at same time as voice spoke from Ratchett’s compartment at 12.37. From 1 A.M. to 1.16 vouched for by other two conductors.)Evidence against him—None.
Suspicious circumstances—The Wagon Lit uniform found is a point in his favor since it seems to have been intended to throw suspicion on him.
EDWARD MASTERMAN, English subject, Berth No. 4, Second Class.
Motive—Possibly arising out of connection with deceased, whose valet he was.
Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Antonio Foscarelli.)Evidence against him of suspicious circumstances—None, except that he is the only man of the right height or size to have worn the Wagon Lit uniform. On the other hand, it is unlikely that he speaks French well.
MRS. HUBBARD, American subject, Berth No. 3, First Class.
Motive—None.
Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M.—None.
Evidence against her or suspicious circumstances—Story of man in her compartment is substantiated by the evidence of Hardman and that of the woman Schmidt.
GRETA OHLSSON, Swedish subject, Berth No. 10, Second Class.
Motive—None.
Alibi—From midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Mary Debenham.)Note: Was last to see Ratchett alive.
PRINCESS DRAGOMIROFF, Naturalised French subject, Berth No. 14, First Class.
Motive—Was intimately acquainted with Armstrong family, and godmother to Sonia Armstrong.
Alibi—from midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor and maid.)Evidence against her or suspicious circumstances—None.
COUNT ANDRENYI, Hungarian subject, Diplomatic passport, Berth No. 13, First Class.
Motive—None.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor—this does not cover period from 1 to 1.15.)COUNTESS ANDRENYI, As above, Berth 12.
Motive—None.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M Took trional and slept. (Vouched for by husband. Trional bottle in her cupboard.)COLONEL ARBUTHNOT, British subject, Berth No. 15, First Class.
Motive—None.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. Talked with MacQueen till 1.30. Went to own compartment and did not leave it. (Substantiated by MacQueen and conductor.)Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—Pipe-cleaner.
CYRUS HARDMAN, American subject, Berth No. 16.
Motive—None known.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. Did not leave compartment. (Substantiated by conductor except for period 1 to 1.15.)Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—None.
ANTONIO FOSCARELLI, American subject (Italian by birth), Berth No. 5, Second Class.
Motive—None known.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Edward Masterman.)Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—None, except that weapon used might be said to suit his temperament (Vide M. Bouc.)MARY DEBENHAM, British subject, Berth No. 11, Second Class.
Motive—None
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by Greta Ohlsson.)Evidence against him or suspicious circumstances—conversation overheard by H. P., and her refusal to explain it.
HILDEGARDE SCHMIDT, German subject, Berth No. 8, Second Class.
Motive—None.
Alibi—Midnight to 2 A.M. (Vouched for by conductor and her mistress.) Went to bed. Was aroused by conductor at 12.38 approx. and went to mistress.
NOTE:—The evidence of the passengers is supported by the statement of the conductor that no one entered or left Mr. Ratchett’s compartment from midnight to 1 o’clock (when he himself went into the next coach) and from 1.15 to 2 o’clock.
“That document, you understand,” said Poirot, “is a mere précis of the evidence we heard, arranged in that way for convenience.”
With a grimace, M. Bouc handed it back. “It is not illuminating,” he said.
“Perhaps you may find this more to your taste,” said Poirot, with a slight smile as he handed him a second sheet of paper.
第三部 赫尔克里·波洛静坐思考
第三部 赫尔克里•波洛静坐思考

第一章　谁             
    波洛走进餐车时，鲍克先生正在和康斯坦丁大夫交谈。看起来，鲍克先生有点儿神情沮丧。
    “来了。”鲍克先生看到他进来，打了个招呼。
    当他的朋友坐下来后，他又添了几句：
    “要是你破了这个案子，我亲爱的，我真的会相信奇迹啦！”
    “这案子使你发愁了？”
    “自然使我发愁。简直摸不着头脑。”
    “我也有同感。”大夫说。
    他好奇地看看波洛。
    “老实说吧，”他说，“我不知道，下一步你该怎么办?”
    “不知道吗？”波洛若有所思地说。
    他拿出烟盒，点燃一支烟。他的眼神恍惚，象是心不在焉似的。
    “对我来说，这恰恰是本案的兴趣所在，”他说。“现在，破案的正常途径已经断了。
我们所得到的证词，究竟是真的，还是假的呢？我们无法判断──除非自己有妙法。这可是个锻炼，动脑子的锻炼。”
    “说得对，”鲍克先生说，“但是，你有什么材料做依据呢？”
    “我刚才已经告诉你了。我们有旅客的证词，有我们亲眼目睹的证据。”
    “好啊，旅客的证词可真好！它们什么也没告诉我们。”
    波洛摇了摇头。
    “我不这么想，朋友。这些证词中，有她几点值得我们注意。”
    “真的，”鲍克先生怀疑地说，“我可是没看出来。”
    “那是因为你没有听出来。”
    “那么，告诉我──我漏了些什么？”
    “就举一个例子来说吧──我们所听到的第一个证词──年轻的麦克昆的证词。依我之见，他说出了一句非常有意义的话。”
    “有关信件的？”
    “不，不是有关信件的。就我所记得的，这句话是：‘我们到处旅行。雷切特先生想看看世界。他为不懂外语而感不方便。说我是他的秘书，还不如说是他的旅行随员。’”
    他看看大夫的脸，又看看鲍克先生的。
    “怎么搞的？还不明白吗？那可不能原谅了。因为，你刚才还有过第二个机会，那人说：‘一个人要是除了会美国话，其他语言一句不懂，很容易上当。’”
    “你的意思是──？”鲍克先生还是显得困惑不解。
    “啊，你想用简单句来表达吧。她听着，这儿就有！雷切特不会说法语。可是昨天晚上，当列车员听到铃声，赶到门口时，房里伟出来的是法语，告诉他，这是个误会，他不需要什么。而且，所用的词语完全是地道的，不是一个只懂几句法语的人用得出来的──‘没什么事，我搞错了。’”
    “这是真的，”康斯坦丁大夫激动地大声说，“我们早就该注意到这点！我还记得，你对我们重复那话时，说得特别重。现在我才懂得，你为什么不愿相信那块砸瘪了的表所给的证据。一点差二十三分时，雷切特已经死了。”
    “那是凶手在说话。”鲍克先生深有感触地说。
    波洛抬抬手，表示不同意。
    “别走得太远。不要想得比我们实际知道的还要多。我认为，在那个时间，一点差十十三分，讲法语是安全的。在雷切特的包房里，还有一个人，这个人要么是法国人，要么能讲一口流利的法语。”
    “你很谨慎，我的老朋友。”
    “一次只应该前进一步。我们还没有确凿的证据，可以证明雷切特是在那时死的。”
    “可是，有一个喊声惊醒了你。”
    “是的，这是事实。”
    “在某种意义上来说，”鲍克先生说，“这一发现，对事情并没有多大影响。你听到有人在隔壁走动。那人不是雷切特，而是另外一个人。毫无疑问，那是作案以后，他在洗刷手上的血迹，清理现场，烧毁那封与谋杀有牵边的信。然后，他就一直等到一切都静下来。当他认为是安全时，既无阻碍，又无危险，他就反锁上雷切特的房门，并搭上链长，找开通向哈伯德太太包房的门，溜了出去。事实上，跟我们原先所想的一模一样──不同的是雷切特死的时间约摸要早半小时。表拨到一点一刻，是为了制造凶手当时不在场的候象。”
    “这样的证据并不十分令人信服，”波洛说。“表针指的是一点一刻──也就是这位不速之客，实际离开现场的确切时间。”
    “是嘛。”鲍克先生说，有点儿糊涂起来。“那么，表本身给了什么启发呢？”
    “假如表针拨过了──我说的是假如──那么，它们所指的时间必定有意义。人们很自然的反应，就是怀疑那个自以为在表针所指的时间，一点一刻时，有着可靠的证据证明他不在现场。”
    “对，对，”大夫说，“这样的推论不错。”
    “我们还必须略微注意一下凶手进房时的时间。什么时候，他才有机会下手呢？除非我们假设那位真正的列车员是同谋，否则，他可能下手的时间只有一个──列车在文科夫戚站停靠时。列车离开文科夫戚后，列车员始终面对过道坐着。任何旅客都不会注意到列车员的。只有那位真正的列车员，就他一个人，会注意到那个冒名顶替者。但列车在文科夫戚停留时，列车员到月台上去了。于是，任何阻碍和危险都没有了。”
    “可我们先前推测，凶手一定是旅客中的一个。”鲍克先生说，“我们还是从头说起吧。他们当中的哪一个呢？”
    波洛微笑了。
    “我已列了个名单，”他说，“假如你们看看，也许会唤起你们的记忆的。”
    大夫和鲍克先生都仔细地看着那张名单。名单条理分明，象数学公式，并且是按照会见次序排列的。
    赫克托•麦克昆──美国人。六号铺。二等。
  动机      可能与死者有关。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（十二点至一点半，阿巴思诺特上校为       他作证；一点一刻至两点，列车员为他作证。）  反证      无。
  疑点      无。
     列车员──皮埃尔•米歇尔──法国人。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（十二点三十七分，雷切特房内有说话       声时，波洛在过道里看到他。一点至一点十六分，其他两      个列车员为他作证。）  反证      无。
  疑点      因为他似乎已经被怀疑到了，发现的列车员制服对他有利。
     爱德华•马斯特曼──英国人。四号铺。二等。
  动机      可能与死者有关，是死者的佣人。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里为他作证。）  反证      无，除了他的身高体型，是适宜穿那件列车员制服的唯一      一人外。
  疑点      另一方面，他不太可能会说一口流利的法语。
     哈伯德太太──美国人。三号铺。头等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点──无。
  反证      哈特曼和施密特的证词，证实了她所说的故事──有个男  或 疑点     人闯进她房里。
    格莱德•奥尔逊──瑞典人。十号铺。二等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（玛丽•德贝汉为她作证。）  注意：她是最后一个见到雷切特活着的人。
    德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人 ── 法国籍。十四号铺。头等。
  动机      与阿姆斯特朗家的关系密切，索妮娅•阿姆斯特朗的教母。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（列车员和女佣人为她作证。）  反证      无。
      或 疑点     无。
    安德烈伯爵──匈牙利人。有外交护照。十三号铺。头等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（列车员为他作证。但不包括一点至一      点十五分这一刻钟。）安德烈伯爵夫人──同上。十二号铺。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点服台俄那，睡觉（她丈夫为她作证。台      俄那药瓶在柜里。）阿巴思诺特上校──英国人。十五号铺。头等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点和麦克昆一直谈到一点半，回房后就没      有离开过（麦克昆和列车员为他作证。）  反证      烟斗通条。
      或 疑点
    赛勒斯•哈特曼──美国人。十六号铺。二等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点。从未离开过包房（麦克昆和列车员为      他作证。）  反证      无。
      或 疑点
    安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里──美籍意大利人。五号铺。二等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（爱德华•马斯特曼为他作证。）  反证      无，除了凶器可能会说成适合他的脾性之外（参问鲍克先  或 疑点  生。）玛丽•德贝汉──英国人。十一号铺。二等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（格莱达•奥尔逊为她作证。）  反证      波洛听到的对话，以及她拒绝对此作出解释。
      或 疑点
    希尔德加德•施密特──德国人。八号铺。二等。
  动机      无。
  时机      十二点至凌晨两点（列车员和她的女主人为她作证。）睡      觉。约在十二点三十八分被列车员唤醒，并去女主人那里。
    注：旅客的证词均为列车员的供述所证实。即，十二点至一点（当时他去隔壁车厢），以及一点一刻至两点，没有人走进或离开过雷切特的包房。
    “这个材料，你们知道，”波洛说，“仅仅是我们所听到的证词的摘要。是为了方便，才这样排列的。”
    鲍克先生做了个怪相。然后把它交还给波洛。
    “这个材料并不能说明问题。”他说。
    “也许这个更合乎你的口味。”波洛说着，递给他另外一张纸，脸上露出一丝微笑。
2 TEN QUESTIONS
2 TEN QUESTIONS
On the paper was written:
THINGS NEEDING EXPLANATION
1.The handkerchief marked with the initial H. Whose is it?
2.The pipe-cleaner. Was it dropped by Colonel Arbuthnot? Or by someone else?
3.Who wore the scarlet kimono?
4.Who was the man or woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform?
5.Why do the hands of the watch point to 1.15?
6.Was the murder committed at that time?
7.Was it earlier?
8.Was it later?
9.Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person?
10.What other explanation of his wounds can there be?
“Well, let us see what we can do,” said M. Bouc, brightening a little at this challenge to his wits. The handkerchief, to begin with. Let us by all means be orderly and methodical.”
“Assuredly,” said Poirot, nodding his head in a satisfied fashion.
M. Bouc continued somewhat didactically.
The initial H is connected with three people—Mrs. Hubbard, Miss Debenham, whose second name is Hermione, and the maid Hildegarde Schmidt.”
“Ah! And of those three?”
“It is difficult to say. But I think I should vote for Miss Debenham. For all one knows she may be called by her second name and not her first. Also there is already some suspicion attaching to her. That conversation you overheard, mon cher, was certainly a little curious, and so is her refusal to explain it.”
“As for me, I plump for the American,” said Dr. Constantine. “It is a very expensive handkerchief, that; and Americans, as all the world knows, do not care what they pay.”
“So you both eliminate the maid?” asked Poirot.
“Yes. As she herself said, it is the handkerchief of a member of the upper classes.”
And the second question—the pipe-cleaner. Did Colonel Arbuthnot drop it, or somebody else?”
“That is more difficult. The English, they do not stab. You are right there. I incline to the view that someone else dropped the pipe-cleaner—and did so to incriminate the long-legged Englishman.”
“As you said, M. Poirot,” put in the doctor, “two clues is too much carelessness. I agree with M. Bouc. The handkerchief was a genuine oversight—hence none of the women will admit that it is hers. The pipe-cleaner is a faked clue. In support of that theory, you notice that Colonel Arbuthnot shows no embarrassment and admits freely to smoking a pipe and using that type of cleaner.”
“You reason well,” said Poirot.
“Question No. 3—Who wore the scarlet kimono!” went on M. Bouc. “As to that, I will confess I have not the slightest idea. Have you any views on the subject, Dr. Constantine?”
“None.”
“Then we confess ourselves beaten there. The next question has, at any rate, possibilities. Who was the man or the woman masquerading in Wagon Lit uniform? Well, one can list with certainty a number of people that it could not have been. Hardman, Colonel Arbuthnot, Foscarelli, Count Andrenyi and Hector MacQueen are all too tall. Mrs. Hubbard, Hildegarde Schmidt and Greta Ohlsson are too broad. That leaves the valet, Miss Debenham, Princess Dragomiroff and Countess Andrenyi—and none of them sounds likely! Greta Ohlsson in one case, and Antonio Foscarelli in the other, both swear that Miss Debenham and the valet never left their compartments. Hildegarde Schmidt swears that the Princess was in hers, and Count Andrenyi has told us that his wife took a sleeping draught. Therefore it seems impossible that it can be anybody—which is absurd!”
“As our old friend Euclid says,” murmured Poirot.
“It must be one of those four,” said Dr. Constantine. “Unless it is someone from outside who has found a hiding-place—and that we agreed was impossible.”
M. Bouc had passed on to the next question on the list.
“No. 5—Why do the hands of the broken watch point to 1.15? I can see two explanations of that. Either it was done by the murderer to establish an alibi, and afterwards, when he meant to leave the compartment, he was prevented by hearing people moving about; or else—wait—I have an idea coming—”
The other two waited respectfully while M. Bouc struggled in mental agony.
“I have it,” he said at last. “It was not the Wagon Lit murderer who tampered with the watch! It was the person we have called the Second Murderer—the left-handed person—in other words the woman in the scarlet kimono. She arrives later and moves back the hands of the watch in order to make an alibi for herself.”
“Bravo said Dr. Constantine. “It is well imagined, that.”
“In fact,” said Poirot, “she stabbed him in the dark, not realizing that he was dead already, but somehow deduced that he had a watch in his pyjama pocket, took it out, put back the hands blindly, and gave it the requisite dent.”
M. Bouc looked at him coldly. “Have you anything better to suggest, yourself?” he asked. “At the moment—no,” admitted Poirot. “All the same,” he went on, “I do not think you have either of you appreciated the most interesting point about that watch.”
“Does question No. 6 deal with it?” asked the doctor. “To that question—Was the murder committed at that time, 1.15?—I answer No.”
“I agree,” said M. Bouc. “’Was it earlier?’ is the next question. I say—Yes! You, too, doctor?”
The doctor nodded. “Yes, but the question ‘Was it later?’ can also be answered in the affirmative. I agree with your theory, M. Bouc, and so, I think, does M. Poirot, although he does not wish to commit himself. The First Murderer came earlier than 1. 15, but the Second Murderer came after 1.15. And as regards the question of left-handedness, ought we not to take steps to ascertain which of the passengers is left-handed?”
“I have not completely neglected that point,” said Poirot. “You may have noticed that I made each passenger write either a signature or an address. That is not conclusive, because some people do certain actions with the right hand and others with the left. Some write right-handed, but play golf left-handed. Still, it is something. Every person questioned took the pen in his or her right hand—with the exception of Princess Dragomiroff, who refused to write.”
“Princess Dragomiroff—impossible,” said M. Bouc.
“I doubt if she would have had the strength to inflict that left-handed blow,” said Dr. Constantine dubiously. ‘That particular wound had been inflicted with considerable force.”
“More force than a woman could use?”
“No, I would not say that. But I think more force than an elderly woman could display, and Princess Dragomiroff’s physique is particularly frail.”
“It might be a question of the influence of mind over body,” said Poirot. “Princess Dragomiroff has great personality and immense will-power. But let us pass from that for the moment.”
“To questions Nos. 9 and 10? Can we be sure that Ratchett was stabbed by more than one person, and what other explanation of the wounds can there be? In my opinion, medically speaking, there can be no other explanation of those wounds. To suggest that one man struck first feebly and then with violence, first with the right hand and then with the left, and after an interval of perhaps half an hour inflicted fresh wounds on a dead body—well, it does not make sense.”
“No,” said Poirot. “It does not make sense. And you think that two murderers do make sense?”
“As you yourself have said, what other explanation can there be?”
Poirot stared straight ahead of him. “That is what I ask myself,” he said. “That is what I never cease to ask myself.”
He leaned back in his seat.
“From now on, it is all here.” He tapped himself on the forehead. “We have thrashed it all out. The facts are all in front of us—neatly arranged with order and method. The passengers have sat here, one by one, giving their evidence. We know all that can be known—from outside ...
He gave M. Bouc an affectionate smile.
“It has been a little joke between us, has it not—this business of sitting back and thinking out the truth? Well, I am about to put my theory into practice—here before your eyes. You two must do the same. Let us all three close our eyes and think. ...
“One or more of those passengers killed Ratchett. Which of them?”
第二章　问题
第二章　问题             
    纸上写着：需要解释的问题。
    ⒈有起首字母Ｈ的手帕。是谁的？
    ⒉为斗通条。是不是阿巴思诺特上校丢失的？或是其他人？
    ⒊谁穿鲜红色的睡衣？
    ⒋谁是那个把自己伪装成列车员的男人或女人？
    ⒌为什么表针会指到一点一刻？
    ⒍谋杀发生在那个时间吗？
    ⒎还是比那时早些？
    ⒏还是迟些？
    ⒐我们能确信，戳死雷切特的人不止一个吗？
    ⒑对他身上的刀伤还有其他解释吗？
    “好了，让我们看看能做些什么，”鲍克先生说，这些问题的提出，使他有点儿喜形于色。“就从手帕开始吧，好歹做事总得有顺序，讲条理。”
    “毫无疑问。”波洛说着，满意地点点头。
    鲍克先生继续往下说，带点儿说教的口气。
    “起首字母Ｈ，与三个人有关──哈伯德太太（Ｈｕｂｂａｒｄ）；德贝汉小姐，她的名字是玛丽•赫米翁（Ｈｅｒｍｉｏｎｅ）；以及女佣人希尔德加德•施密特（ＨｉｌｄｅｇａｒｄｅＳｃｈｍｉｄｔ）。”
    “啊，那么说，是这人中的一个罗？”
    “目前还很难说。但我想，我倾向于德贝汉小姐。也许人们都叫她的第二名字，而不叫第一名字，谁知道呢。另外，已经有些疑点与她有关。你所听到的对话，我亲爱的，一定有点蹊跷，同样，她的拒绝解释，也有点儿奇怪。”
    “我倒认为是那个美国人。”康斯坦丁大夫说。“那是一块价格非常昂贵的手帕，几乎所有的人都知道美国人买东西是不太在乎的。”
    “那么，你们都排除了女佣人的可能性啦？”波洛问道。
    “是的，正象她自己说的那样，那块手帕是上层阶级某个人的。”
    “至于第二个问题──烟斗通条。是阿巴思诺特上校失落的吗？或是其他人？”
    “这更因给。英国人一般不搞暗杀，这一点，你是对的。我倾向于这个看法，即，通条是另外一个丢下的──目的是为了使那长腿英国人受到牵连。”
    “照你这么说，波洛先生，”大夫插嘴道，“两条线索都是因为凶手太粗心了。我同意鲍克先生的意见。手帕确是个疏忽──因而，没有人会承认手帕是他（或她）的。烟斗通条是条假线索。要证实这个推论并不难，你们一定注意到这样一个事实，阿巴思诺特上校一点也不显得尴尬，反而直率地承认他抽烟斗，并使用这样的烟斗通条。”
    “你的推理不错。”波洛说。
    “第三个问题──谁穿那件鲜红色的睡衣呢？”鲍克先生接着说，“有关这个么，坦率地说，我边一点影子还没找到。对这个问题，你有什么看法，大夫？”
    “没有。”
    “那我们得承认，就这一点，我们输了。下一个问题，我们好歹有点头绪。谁是那个把自己伪装成列车员的男人或是女人呢？嗯，可以肯定地说，有许多人是扯不上的。哈特曼、阿巴思诺特上校、福斯卡拉里、安德烈伯爵以及麦克昆等人都太高。哈伯德太太、希尔德加德•施密特和格莱达•奥尔逊的肩膀太宽。那么，只剩下雷切特的男佣人、德贝汉小姐、德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人和安德烈伯爵夫人──可是，任何一个人看来都不太可能！格莱达•奥尔逊和它东尼奥•福斯卡拉里都发誓赌咒，分别证明德贝汉小姐和那个男佣人从未离开过自己的房间；希尔德加德•施密特保证，公爵夫人一直呆在自己的包房里；安德烈伯爵则告诉我们，他的夫人吃安眠药。因此，任何人都在嫌疑之列，看来是不可能的──况且是荒唐的。”
    “就象我们的老朋友欧几里德说的那样。”波洛含糊地说。
    “肯定是那四人中的一个，”康斯坦丁大夫说，“除非从外面进来的某个人找到了藏身之地──可是，这一点，我们都认为是不可能的。”
    鲍克先生却谈起单子上的下一个问题来。
    “第五个问题──为什么表针会指到一点一刻？我发现有两种解释。或者说，这是凶手制造的现场，目的是为了证明其作案时不在场，后来，由于听到外面人来人往，他想逃离这个现场时已经来不及了；或者说──等一下──我有了个新的想法──”
    在鲍克先生冥思苦想时，波洛和大夫都恭敬地等候着他的最新发现。
    “想出来了，”他终于开了口，“拨表针的不是穿列车员制服的人！而是我们叫做第二凶手──左撇子──换句话说，就是那个穿鲜红色睡衣的女人！她去的迟，为了不引起怀疑，就拨了表针。”
    “妙极了！”康斯坦丁大夫说，“你真会想象。”
    “实际上，”波波说，“她是在黑暗中戳中的，没有想到他已经死了，可是，不知怎么地推测，在他睡衣口袋里有一块表，就把它掏出来，盲目拨针，并且把它敲瘪。”
    鲍克先生冷冷地看着他。
    “还有什么更好的想法？”他问道。
    “此刻──还没有。”波洛答道。
    “反正，”他接着说，“我认为，你们两位都没发现那块表的最有趣的一点。”
    “就是第六个问题要回答的吗？”大夫问道，“对于这个问题──谋杀是发生在一点一刻吗？──我的回答是否定的。”
    “我同意，”鲍克先生说，“下一个问题是──比一点一刻早吗？我说，是的。大夫，你也这样想，是吗？”
    大夫点点头。
    “是的。但是，‘比一点一刻迟吗？’对这一问题的回答也是肯定的。我同意你的推论，鲍克先生，而且，我想，波洛先生也会同意的，尽管他不想承认。第一个凶手在一点一刻之前作的案，第二个凶手则在一点一刻以后行刺的。至于左撇子的问题，我们是否应该采取措施，弄清楚旅客中，谁是左撇子？”
    “我还没有完全忽视这一点，”波洛说，“你们可能已经注意到，我要每个旅客都签名，或留下地址。可这并不是决定性的证据，因为，有的人用右手做某些事，而用左手做另一些事。有的人用右手写字，可有左手打高尔夫球。但是，可能会有些帮助。除了拒绝写字的德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，所有的旅客都是用右手写的。”
    “德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，不可能的。”鲍克先生说。
    “我怀疑，凭她的力气，能戳那左撇子的一刀吗？”
    康斯坦丁大夫疑惑地说，“那一刀要用相当大的力气。”
    “比一个女人的力气大吗？”
    “不，我并不是这个意思。可是，我认为，至和要比一个老妇人的力气大，而德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人的体质尤其弱。”
    “也许这是一个精神对肉体的影响问题。”波洛说，“德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人具有坚强的个性和巨大的意志力，不过，我们还是暂且把它搁一搁吧。”
    “至于第九和第十两个问题，我们是否能够确信，雷切特不止被一人所杀？刀伤还有什么其他的解释？依我看，就医学上而言，那些刀伤是没有任何其他解释的。假定说，一个男人先轻轻一戳，然后再大力戳，先用右手，再用左手。大约半小时后，再在尸体上戳几刀──当然，这个假设是不成立的。”
    “对，”波波说，“不成立的。可是，你认为有两个凶手的假设就能成立吗？”
    “就象你刚才说的那样，还有什么其它的解释呢？”
    波洛双眼直盯着他。
    “这正是我自己问自己的，”他说，“而且一直不停地问我自己的问题。”
    他向后一仰，靠在椅子里。
    “从现在起，一切都在这里面了。”他拍拍自己的脑门说。“我们已经深入研究过这些问题。事实也都在我们面前了，而且秩序井然，有条不紊。旅客们一个一个都传到这来过，轮流提供了证词。我们已经知道所有我们能够知道的东西──从外界……”
    他朝鲍克先生亲切地笑了笑。
    “我们好象在开玩笑，是吗？──这样靠座椅，能想得出真相吗？好吧，我马上要所理论付诸于实践──就在这儿，你们眼前。你们俩也必须这样做。让我们三人都闭上眼睛，静静思考……“雷切特是被一个或更多的旅客杀死的。那是他们当中的哪几个呢？”
3 CERTAIN SUGGESTIVE POINTS
3 CERTAIN SUGGESTIVE POINTS
It was quite a quarter of an hour before anyone spoke.
M. Bouc and Dr. Constantine had started by trying to obey Poirot’s instructions. They had endeavoured to see through a maze of conflicting particulars to a clear and outstanding solution.
M. Bouc’s thoughts had run something as follows:
“Assuredly I must think. But as far as that goes I have already thought. ... Poirot obviously thinks that this English girl is mixed up in the matter. I cannot help feeling that that is most unlikely. ... The English are extremely cold. Probably it is because they have no figures. ... But that is not the point. It seems that the Italian could not have done it—a pity. I suppose the English valet is not lying when he said the other never left the compartment? But why should he! It is not easy to bribe the English; they are so unapproachable. The whole thing is most unfortunate. I wonder when we shall get out of this. There must be some rescue work in progress. They are so slow in these countries ... it is hours before anyone thinks of doing anything. And the police of these countries, they will be most trying to deal with—puffed up with importance, touchy, on their dignity. They will make a grand affair of all this. It is not often that such a chance comes their way. It will be in all the newspapers. ...”
And from there on, M. Bouc’s thoughts went along a well-worn course which they had already traversed some hundred times.
Dr. Constantine’s thoughts ran thus:
“He is queer, this little man. A genius? Or a crank? Will he solve this mystery? Impossible—I can see no way out of it. It is all too confusing. ... Everyone is lying, perhaps. ... But even then, that does not help one. If they are all lying, it is just as confusing as if they were speaking the truth. Odd about those wounds. I cannot understand it. ... It would be easier to understand if he had been shot—after all, the term ‘gunman’ must mean that they shoot with a gun. A curious country, America. I should like to go there. It is so progressive. When I get home I must get hold of Demetrius Zagone—he has been to America, he has all the modern ideas. ... I wonder what Zia is doing at this moment. If my wife ever finds out—”
His thoughts went on to entirely private matters. ...
Hercule Poirot sat very still.
One might have thought he was asleep.
And then, suddenly, after a quarter of an hour’s complete immobility his eyebrows began to move slowly up his forehead. A little sigh escaped him. He murmured beneath his breath.
“But after all, why not? And if so—why, if so, that would explain everything.”
His eyes opened. They were green like a cat’s. He said softly: “Eh bien. I have thought. And you?”
Lost in their reflections, both men started violently.
“I have thought also,” said M. Bouc, just a shade guiltily. “But I have arrived at no conclusion. The elucidation of crime is your métier, not mine, my friend.”
“I, too, have reflected with great earnestness,” said the doctor, unblushingly recalling his thoughts from certain pornographic details. “I have thought of many possible theories, but not one that really satisfies me.”
Poirot nodded amiably. His nod seemed to say:
“Quite right. That is the proper thing to say. You have given me the cue I expected.”
He sat very upright, threw out his chest, caressed his moustache and spoke in the manner of a practised speaker addressing a public meeting.
“My friends, I have reviewed the facts in my mind, and have also gone over to myself the evidence of the passengers—with this result: I see, nebulously as yet, a certain explanation that would cover the facts as we know them. It is a very curious explanation, and I cannot be sure as yet that it is the true one. To find out definitely I shall have to make certain experiments.
“I would like first to mention certain points which appear to me suggestive. Let us start with a remark made to me by M. Bouc in this very place on the occasion of our first lunch together on the train. He commented on the fact that we were surrounded by people of all classes, of all ages, of all nationalities. That is a fact somewhat rare at this time of year. The Athens-Paris and the Bucharest-Paris coaches, for instance, are almost empty. Remember also, the passenger who failed to turn up. He is, I think, significant. Then there are some minor points that strike me as suggestive—for instance, the position of Mrs. Hubbard’s sponge-bag, the name of Mrs. Armstrong’s mother, the detective methods of M. Hardman, the suggestion of M. MacQueen that Ratchett himself destroyed the charred note we found, Princess Dragomiroff’s Christian name, and a grease spot on a Hungarian passport.”
The two men stared at him.
“Do they suggest anything to you, those points?” asked Poirot.
“Not a thing,” said M. Bouc frankly.
“And M. le docteur?”
“I do not understand in the least what you are talking of.”
M. Bouc, meanwhile, seizing upon the one tangible thing his friend had mentioned, was sorting through the passports. With a grunt he picked up that of Count and Countess Andrenyi and opened it.
“Is this what you mean? This dirty mark?”
“Yes. It is a fairly fresh grease spot. You notice where it occurs?”
“At the beginning of the description of the Count’s wife—her Christian name, to be exact. But I confess that I still do not see the point.”
“I am going to approach it from another angle. Let us go back to the handkerchief found at the scene of the crime. As we stated not long ago, three people are associated with the letter H: Mrs. Hubbard, Miss Debenham and the maid, Hildegarde Schmidt. Now let us regard that handkerchief from another point of view. It is, my friends, an extremely expensive handkerchief—an objet de luxe, hand-made, embroidered in Paris. Which of the passengers, apart from the initial, was likely to own such a handkerchief? Not Mrs. Hubbard, a worthy woman with no pretensions to reckless extravagance in dress. Not Miss Debenham—that class of Englishwoman has a dainty linen handkerchief, not an expensive wisp of cambric costing perhaps two hundred francs. And certainly not the maid. But there are two women on the tram who would be likely to own such a handkerchief. Let us see if we can connect them in any way with the letter H. The two women I refer to are Princess Dragomiroff—”
“Whose Christian name is Natalia,” put in M. Bouc ironically.
“Exactly. And her Christian name, as I said just now, is decidedly suggestive. The other woman is Countess Andrenyi. And at once something strikes us—”
“You!”
“Me, then. Her Christian name on her passport is disfigured by a blob of grease. just an accident, anyone would say. But consider that Christian name. Elena. Suppose that, instead of Elena, it were Helena. That capital H could be turned into a capital E and then run over the small e next to it quite easily—and then a spot of grease dropped to cover up the alteration.”
“Helena!” cried M. Bouc. “It is an idea, that.”
“Certainly it is an idea! I look about for any confirmation, however slight, of my idea—and I find it. One of the luggage labels on the Countess’s baggage is slightly damp. It is one that happens to run over the first initial on top of the case. That label has been soaked off and put on again in a different place.”
“You begin to convince me,” said M. Bouc. “But the Countess Andrenyi—surely—”
“Ah, now, mon vieux, you must turn yourself round and approach an entirely different angle of the case. How was this murder intended to appear to everybody? Do not forget that the snow has upset all the murderer’s original plan. Let us imagine, for a little minute, that there is no snow, that the train proceeded on its normal course. What, then, would have happened?
“The murder, let us say, would still have been discovered in all probability at the Italian frontier early this morning. Much of the same evidence would have been given to the Italian police. The threatening letters would have been produced by M. MacQueen; M. Hardman would have told his story; Mrs. Hubbard would have been eager to tell how a man passed through her compartment; the button would have been found. I imagine that two things only would have been different. The man would have passed through Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment just before one o’clock—and the Wagon Lit uniform would have been found cast off in one of the toilets.”
“You mean?”
“I mean that the murder was planned to look like an outside job. It would have been presumed that the assassin had left the train at Brod where it is timed to arrive at 0.58. Somebody would probably have passed a strange Wagon Lit conductor in the corridor. The uniform would be left in a conspicuous place so as to show clearly just how the trick had been played. No suspicion would have attached to the passengers. That, my friends, was how the affair was intended to appear to the outside world.
“But the accident to the train changes everything. Doubtless we have here the reason why the man remained in the compartment with his victim so long. He was waiting for the train to go on. But at last he realised that the train was not going on. Different plans would have to be made. The murderer would now be known to be still on the train.”
“Yes, yes,” said M. Bouc impatiently. “I see all that. But where does the handkerchief come in?”
“I am returning to it by a somewhat circuitous route. To begin with, you must realise that the threatening letters were in the nature of a blind. They might have been lifted bodily out of an indifferently written American crime novel. They are not real. They are, in fact, simply intended for the police. What we have to ask ourselves is: ‘Did they deceive Ratchett?’ On the face of it, the answer seems to be No. His instructions to Hardman seem to point to a definite ‘private’ enemy, of whose identity he was well aware. That is, if we accept Hardman’s story as true. But Ratchett certainly received one letter of a very different character—the one containing a reference to the Armstrong baby, a fragment of which we found in his compartment. In case Ratchett had not realised it sooner, this was to make sure that he understood the reason of the threats against his life. That letter, as I have said all along, was not intended to be found. The murderer’s first care was to destroy it. This, then, was the second hitch in his plans. The first was the snow, the second was our reconstruction of that fragment.
“That the note was destroyed so carefully can mean only one thing. There must be on the train someone so intimately connected with the Armstrong family that the finding of that note would immediately direct suspicion upon that person.
“Now we come to the other two clues that we found. I pass over the pipe-cleaner. We have already said a good deal about that. Let us pass on to the handkerchief. Taken at its simplest it is a clue which directly incriminates someone whose initial is H, and it was dropped there unwittingly by that person.”
“Exactly,” said Dr. Constantine. “She finds out that she has dropped the handkerchief and immediately takes steps to conceal her Christian name.”
“How fast you go! You arrive at a conclusion much sooner than I would permit myself to do.”
“Is there any other alternative?”
‘Certainly there is. Suppose, for instance, that you have committed a crime and wish to cast the blame for it on someone else. Well, there is on the train a certain person connected intimately with the Armstrong family—a woman. Suppose, then, that you leave there a handkerchief belonging to that woman. She will be questioned, her connection with the Armstrong family will be brought out—et voilà: motive—and an incriminating article of evidence.”
“But in such a case,” objected the doctor, “the person indicated, being innocent, would not take steps to conceal her identity.”
“Ah, really? That is what you think? That is, truly, the opinion of the police court. But I know human nature, my friend, and I tell you that, suddenly confronted with the possibility of being tried for murder, the most innocent person will lose his head and do the most absurd things. No, no, the grease spot and the changed label do not prove guilt—they only prove that the Countess Andrenyi is anxious for some reason to conceal her identity.”
“What do you think her connection with the Armstrong family can be? She has never been in America, she says.”
“Exactly, and she speaks English with a foreign accent, and she has a very foreign appearance which she exaggerates. But it should not be difficult to guess who she is. I mentioned just now the name of Mrs. Armstrong’s mother. It was ‘Linda Arden,’ and she was a very celebrated actress—among other things a Shakespearean actress. Think of As You Like It, with the Forest of Arden and Rosalind. It was there she got the inspiration for her acting name. ‘Linda Arden,’ the name by which she was known all over the world, was not her real name. It may have been Goldenberg; it is quite likely that she had Central European blood in her veins—a strain of Jewish, perhaps. Many nationalities drift to America. I suggest to you, gentlemen, that that young sister of Mrs. Armstrong’s, little more than a child at the time of the tragedy, was Helena Goldenberg, the younger daughter of Linda Arden, and that she married Count Andrenyi when he was an attaché in Washington.”
“But Princess Dragomiroff says that the girl married an Englishman.”
“Whose name she cannot remember! I ask you, my friends, is that really likely? Princess Dragomiroff loved Linda Arden as great ladies do love great artists. She was godmother to one of the actress’s daughters. Would she forget so quickly the married name of the other daughter? It is not likely. No, I think we can safely say that Princess Dragomiroff was lying. She knew Helena was on the train, she had seen her. She realised at once, as soon as she heard who Ratchett really was, that Helena would be suspected. And so, when we question her as to the sister, she promptly lies—is vague, cannot remember, but ‘thinks Helena married an Englishman’—a suggestion as far away from the truth as possible.”
One of the restaurant attendants came through the door at the end and approached them. He addressed M. Bouc. “The dinner, Monsieur, shall I serve it? It is ready some little time.”
M. Bouc looked at Poirot. The latter nodded. “By all means, let dinner be served.”
The attendant vanished through the doors at the other end. His bell could be heard ringing and his voice upraised:
“Premier service. Le d?ner est servi. Premier d?ner—First service.”
第三章　启发性的几点
第三章　启发性的几点             
    足有一刻钟，他们谁也没讲话。
    鲍克先生和康斯坦丁大夫开始遵照波洛的意思──静坐思考。他们努力想从一连串相互矛盾的细节中，得出一个清楚而正确的结论。
    鲍克先生的思路大致如下：
    “毫无疑问我得思考。但是，对于那几个问题，我已经都捉摸过了……很明显波洛认为那个英国姑娘与本案有牵连。我不得不感到这是不可能的。英国人是非常冷静的，也许是因为他们的体质太弱……但这并不打紧。看来，那个意大利人不会是凶手──真遗憾，我想，英国男佣人说他房里的那一位从未离开过时，不会是说谎吧．可他这么干是为什么呢？要想贿赂英国人，不是那么容易的，他们是如此的难以接近。这整个事情实在倒霉。我不知道，我们何年何月才能脱离一困境。在列车行进中，应该有某种救援工作。但是，在这些国家里，铸事老是慢吞吞的……任何人在做任何事之前，总是要想它几个小时。而且，这些国家的警察也是最难对付的──傲慢自负，暴躁乖戾。他们会把事情闹得很大。因为，这种机会是难得的。所有的报纸都会提起……”
    从这里起，鲍克先生的思路又沿着一条老路──一条他们已经走过几百遍的老路──走下去了。
    康斯坦丁大夫的想法如下：
    “他真古怪，这个小个子。他是天才吗？还是个怪人？他会揭穿这个秘密吗？不可能。
我看不出有什么法子。实在太乱了……也许，每个人都在说谎……然而，并不能起什么作用。假如他们都在说谎，为什么会如此迷惑人，好象他们是在讲真情。那些刀伤的说法太离奇了。简直不能理解──假如他是枪打死的，或许更容易理解──毕竟，带枪的人，这个词的意思是，用枪射击的人。美国真是一个古怪的国家。我应该到那儿去。它真进步。回家后，我得找到德为特里斯•齐娅──她去过美国，所有现代思想，她都有。我不知道齐娅现在正在做什么。我的妻子是否已发现……”
    他的思路完全走上了私事的轨道。
    赫卡尔•波洛一动不动地坐在那儿。
    人匀也许以为他睡着了。
    经过一刻钟的木然呆坐以后，他的眉头突然慢慢地舒展开来，轻轻地叹了一声，含混不清地说：
    “可是，毕竟，为什么不会呢？假如是那样──嗯，假如是那样，一切都可解释了。”
    他的眼睛睁开了，绿得就象猫眼一样。他低声说：
    “好，我已想过了，你们呢？”
    由于经过一刻钟的沉思，两人都大声说起来。
    “我也想过了，”鲍克先生在点心虚地说，“但是，我得不出结论。如何解释这一案件，这是你事而不是我的事，朋友。”
    “我也认认真真地想过了，”大夫毫不脸红地说，又回忆起那些色情的细节。“我想到过许多种可能，但没一个能使我满意。”
    波洛和蔼地点点头，好象是在说：
    “很好，这样说还是合乎情理的。你们已经给了我想要的提示。”
    他挺起胸，笔直地坐在那儿，一边捻着他的小胡子，一边说了起来。他的神情就好象一个见习演说家正对大会演说。
    “朋友们，我回顾了所有的事实，以及每个旅客的证词──得出了一个结论。虽然有点模模糊糊，仍旧看到了某种掩盖事实真相的解释。这个解释很怪。到目前为止，我还不能确信它是真的。要弄确实的话，我还得做些试验。”
    “我想先提出几点。这几点，看来对我们会有所启发。我们可以从鲍克先生对我说的一句话说起。这句话恰好就这里。是我俩第一次一起在火车上吃饭时讲的。他谈到这样一个事实，即，我们周围是一伙不同阶级，不同年龄和不同国家的人。而在这种时刻出现了这样一群形形色色的人，是比较少见的。比如说，雅典──巴黎和布加勒思特──巴黎这两节车厢，就几乎是空的。请记住，还有一个旅客没赶上车。我认为，这一事实是重要的。然后是比较次要的几点，但变有启发性──例如，哈伯德太太的手提包的位置；阿姆思特朗太太母亲的名字；哈特曼先生的侦探方法；麦克昆的说法──是雷切特自己毁了我们所发现的那张烧焦了的信；德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人的教名；以及匈牙利人护照上的油迹。”
    两人都盯着他看。
    “这此事实，对你们有什么启发？”波洛问他们。
    “一点也没有。”鲍克先生坦率地说。
    “你呢，大夫？”
    “你说的，我一点也听不懂。”
    这时，鲍克先生根据波洛刚才提到的护照问题，正在仔细地整理和分析各人的护照。忽然，他哼了一声，拣出来安德烈伯爵夫妇的护照，打了开来。
    “你指的是这份吗？这个油迹吗？”
    “是的。油迹还比较新鲜。你可注意到它是在什么地方吗？”
    “在伯爵夫人的姓名这栏的开头──确切地说，在她教名的头上几个字母。但是，我承认，我还是没看到它的重要性。”
    “我将从另一角度来分析。先回到现场所发现的那块手帕上吧。正如不久能前我们讨论过的那样，三个人与字母Ｈ有关──哈伯德太太，德贝汉小姐和女佣人希尔德加德•施密特。现在，让我们用另一种观点来看看这块手帕。朋友们，这是一块很贵的手帕──一件奢侈品，手工织的，巴黎刺绣。所有旅客中，不管起首字母是什么，谁最配有这样一块手帕呢？哈伯德太太，不可能。她是个合时宜的女人，不想要过分奢侈的衣着。德贝汉小姐，也不可能，那种英国女人往往带有一块好看的、亚麻布手帕，而不可能有价值约两百法朗、昂贵的细棉布手帕。让我们先看看，是否能把她们两人和字母Ｈ联系起来，我指的是德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人──”
    “她的教名可是娜塔莉娅，”鲍克先生挖苦地插嘴道。
    “一个不错。可她的教名，就象我刚才说过的那样，肯定对我们有启发，另外一个是安德烈伯爵夫人。我们马上就会联想到──”
    “只有你会联想到！”
    “就算是我。她护照上的教名，因为有油迹，看不清楚了。任何人都会说，这只是偶然的巧合。然而，想一想那个教名。爱琳娜，假如不是爱琳娜（Ｅｅｌｎａ）而是海琳娜（Ｈｅｌｅｎａ）。大写字母Ｈ能改成大写Ｅ，并且很容易盖住右边的小写ｅ，然后，再搞上一点油污，掩盖涂改的痕迹。”
    “海琳娜，”鲍克先生喊了起来，“好一个想法。”
    “当然好罗！我一直在为我这一想法寻找佐证，不管多么微不足道──现在可找到了。
伯爵夫人行李上的行李标签已经有点儿潮了。最重要的是，水迹也刚好弄糊了起首字母。而且，那张标签已经湿得脱开了，还被贴在另外一外地方。”
    “你开始使我有点儿相信了，”鲍克先生说，“可是，安德烈伯爵夫人──肯定──”
    “啊，现在，我的老朋友，你得改变自己原来的想法，从另一个完全不同的角度来对待这个案子。那么，凶手是打算怎样出场的呢？别忘了，这场大雪搅乱了他原先的计划。可以设想，要是没有雪，列车继续它正常的行程。那么，会发生什么呢？”
    “可以说，凶手有可能早在今天上午，在意大利边境时，就会被发现。意大利警察也会得到相同的证词。麦克昆先生会搬出恐吓信；哈特曼先生会讲他的故事；哈伯德太太会急于向每一个谈一个男人穿过了她的包房；钮扣也会被发现。想象当中，只有两件事有所不同。
那个男人穿过哈伯德太太包房的时间，恰好在一点钟之前──列车员制服会被发现，已经丢在两个盥洗室中的一个里。”
    “你的意思是──？”
    “我的意思是，凶手原来的打算，使谋杀案看起来像车外人干的。凶手原计划在布罗特站下车，列车正点到站时间是零点五十八分。有人可能会在过道上碰到一个陌生的列车员。
制服会被搁在一个引人注目的地方，借以清楚地表明，这个鬼花样是怎么搞出来的。所有的旅客也就会受到怀疑。朋友们，这就是凶手原来精心炮制的计划。”
    “可是，一切都由于列车出了事故而改变了。毫无疑问，我们已经有理由，说明为什么那个男人在死者房内呆了这么久。他在等待列车继续上路。但是，最后，他意识到列车开不了啦。他不得不作出另一个计划。现在可以知道，凶手一定还在车上。”
    “对，对。”鲍克先生迫不及待地说，“我全明白了。可是，手帕是怎么进来的呢？”
    “我正要谈呢，不过要拐点弯，先不直接谈它。首先，你们必须认识到，那些恐吓信并没有明确的目标。也许是从一本蹩脚的美国侦探小说里抄来的。它们不是真的。其实，纯粹是为了迷惑警察而写的。我们必须问自己的是：‘它们是用来欺骗雷切特的吗？’表面看来，回答似乎应该是否定的。他给哈特曼的指示，看来是针对一个明确的‘私’敌的。对这个宿敌的身份，他也是一清二楚的。先决条件是，假如我们相信哈特曼的故事是真实的。但是，雷切特肯定收到了一封与众十分不同的信──提到阿姆斯特朗小孩的那封信。我们在他的包房里已经发现了它的一个碎片。万一雷切特没有意识到，危险已经迫在眉睫，那封信就是为了使他确实知道，为什么他的生命安全会受到威胁。恰恰是那封信，正象我们说过的那样，凶手是不愿让任何人其他人知道的。因此，作案后，凶手所关注的第一件事便是销毁它。这也就是他计划中的第二个障碍。这第一个是雪；第二个是，我们重新使碎片得到复原。”
    “那封信──已被如此小心地毁掉了的信──中能说明一个事实。列车上，一定有什么人，跟阿姆斯特朗家的关系相当密切，以致发现那封信，就会引起直接怀疑那个人。”“好了，我们再来看看已经发现的另外两条线索。烟斗通条的问题，先搁一搁，关于它，我们谈得很多了，还是来讲讲手帕吧！简单地说，这个线索可直接牵连到某个人，这个人名字的起首字母是Ｈ，而他（或她）无意地把它丢在那里了。”
    “对极了。”康斯坦丁大夫说。“当她发觉手帕失落时，就立即采取措施，隐瞒他的教名──”
    “你想得真快，我还来不及想，你已经得出了结论。”
    “还有其它的结论吗？”
    “当然有。例如，假设你作了案，但希望使其它人受到怀疑。好吧，列车上就有这么一个人──一个女人，与阿姆斯特朗家的关系非常密切。假设，那时，你留下她的手帕……她就会被传讯，她和阿姆斯特朗家的关系就会暴露无遗──就是那样。作案动机──以及一件与谋杀案有牵连的物证。”
    “可是，在这个案子里，”大夫反驳说，“她是无罪的。因为她没有打算隐瞒自己的身份。”
    “啊，真的？你是这样想的吗？这正是警察当局的意见。可我懂得人性，朋友，告诉你吧，一个人要是因谋杀而突然面临审讯时，虽然是最无辜的，也会失去头脑，做出最荒唐的事来。不，不，油迹和重贴的标签并不能证明有罪──它们只能证明安德烈伯爵夫人，由于某种原因，急于隐瞒自己的身份。”
    “那么，你认为，她和阿姆斯特朗家有什么关系呢？她说，她从来也没有到过美国。”
    “确切地说，她的英语是不标准的。她的异国外表也太过分了点。然而，要猜出她是谁，并不困难，刚才，我还提到过阿姆斯特朗太太母亲的名字──琳达•阿登。她是一个很著名的演员──而且，最拿手的是演沙士比亚的戏。想一想《皆大欢喜》──阿登和罗沙林德森林。她就是从那里获得灵感，而给自己取艺名的。大概是戈尔登伯格──在她的血管里，很可能有中欧人的血液──也许还有点儿犹太人血缘，而流落到美国去的，有许多不同国家的人。先生们，我提醒你们注意，阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹是海琳娜•戈尔登伯格，琳达•阿登的小女儿。拐骗悲剧发生时，她比那小孩大不了多少。后来，她跟安德伯爵结了婚，当时他是在华盛顿当专员。”
    “可是，德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人说，她是跟一个英国人结的婚。”
    “可她记不得他的名字了！我问你们，朋友，这可能吗？德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人爱琳达•阿登，就象贵妇人都爱名演员一样。她是琳达一个女儿的教母。她真的会这么快就忘了她另一个女儿的夫名吗？这不太可能吧。不可能。我可以肯定，德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人撒了谎。她知道海琳娜在车上，而且见到过她。她一听到雷切特地本来面目时，就意识到海琳娜会受到怀疑。因此，当我们问到阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹时，她马上就说谎了──说什么‘不清楚’，‘记不得’，只记‘得她跟英国人结的婚’──总之，尽可能说得离真相远些。”
    一个餐车侍者走到他们前面，对鲍克先生说：
    “吃饭了，先生们。要送上来吗？已经做好了一会儿啦。”
    鲍克先生朝波洛看看，后者点点头。
    “很好，来吧。”
    侍者从另一个门走出去。然后，就听到铃声和他的大嗓门：
    “开始供应。供应晚饭。晚饭开始──第一桌。”
4 THE GREASE SPOT ON A HUNGARIAN PASSPORT
4 THE GREASE SPOT ON A HUNGARIAN PASSPORT
Poirot shared a table with M. Bouc and the doctor.
The company assembled in the restaurant car was a very subdued one. They spoke little. Even the loquacious Mrs. Hubbard was unnaturally quiet. She murmured as she sat:
“I don’t feel as though I had the heart to eat anything,” and then partook of everything offered her, encouraged by the Swedish lady who seemed to regard her as a special charge.
Before the meal was served, Poirot had caught the chief attendant by the sleeve and murmured something to him. Constantine made a pretty good guess as to what the instructions had been when he noticed that the Count and Countess Andrenyi were always served last and that at the end of the meat there was a delay in making out their bill. It therefore came about that the Count and Countess were the last left in the restaurant car.
When they rose at length and moved in the direction of the door, Poirot sprang up and followed them.
“Pardon, Madame, you have dropped your handkerchief.”
He was holding out to her the tiny monogrammed square.
She took it, glanced at it, then handed it back to him. “You are mistaken, Monsieur, that is not my handkerchief.”
“Not your handkerchief? Are you sure?”
“Perfectly sure, Monsieur.”
“And yet, Madame, it has your initial—the initial H.”
The Count made a sudden movement. Poirot ignored him. His eyes were fixed on the Countess’s face.
Looking steadily at him she replied:
“I do not understand, Monsieur. My initials are E. A.”
“I think not. Your name is Helena—not Elena. Helena Goldenberg, the younger daughter of Linda Arden—Helena Goldenberg, the sister of Mrs. Armstrong.”
There was a dead silence for a minute or two. Both the Count and the Countess had gone deadly white.
Poirot said in a gentler tone: “It is of no use denying. That is the truth, is it not?”
The Count burst out furiously, “I demand, Monsieur, by what right you—”
She interrupted him, putting up a small hand towards his mouth.
“No, Rudolph. Let me speak. It is useless to deny what this gentleman says. We had better sit down and talk the matter out.”
Her voice had changed. It still had the southern richness of tone, but it had become suddenly more clear cut and incisive. It was, for the first time, a definitely American voice.
The Count was silenced. He obeyed the gesture of her hand and they both sat down opposite Poirot.
“Your statement, Monsieur, is quite true,” said the Countess. “I am Helena Goldenberg, the younger sister of Mrs. Armstrong.”
“You did not acquaint me with that fact this morning, Madame la Comtesse.”
“No.”
“In fact, all that your husband and you told me was a tissue of lies.”
“Monsieur!” cried the Count angrily.
“Do not be angry, Rudolph. M. Poirot puts the fact rather brutally, but what he says is undeniable.”
“I am glad you admit the fact so freely, Madame. Will you now tell me your reasons for that, and also for altering your Christian name on your passport?”
“That was my doing entirely,” put in the Count.
Helena said quietly: “Surely, M. Poirot, you can guess my reason—our reason. This man who was killed is the man who murdered my baby niece, who killed my sister, who broke my brother-in-law’s heart. Three of the people I loved best and who made up my home—my world!”
Her voice rang out passionately. She was a true daughter of that mother the emotional force of whose acting had moved huge audiences to tears.
She went on more quietly.
“Of all the people on the train I alone had probably the best motive for killing him.”
“And you did not kill him, Madame?”
“I swear to you, M. Poirot—and my husband knows—and will swear also—that much as I may have been tempted to do so, I never lifted a hand against that man.”
“I, too, gentlemen.” said the Count. “I give you my word of honour that last night Helena never left her compartment. She took a sleeping draught exactly as I said. She is utterly and entirely innocent.”
Poirot looked from one to the other of them.
“On my word of honour,” repeated the Count.
Poirot shook his head slightly.
“And yet you took it upon yourself to alter the name in the passport?”
“Monsieur Poirot,” the Count said earnestly and passionately, “consider my position. Do you think I could stand the thought of my wife dragged through a sordid police case? She was innocent, I knew it, but what she said was true—because of her connection with the Armstrong family she would have been immediately suspected. She would have been questioned—attested, perhaps. Since some evil chance had taken us on the same train as this man Ratchett, there was, I felt sure, but one thing for it. I admit, Monsieur, that I lied to you—all, that is, save in one thing. My wife never left her compartment last night.”
He spoke with an earnestness that it was hard to gainsay.
“I do not say that I disbelieve you, Monsieur,” said Poirot slowly. “Your family is, I know, a proud and ancient one. It would be bitter indeed for you to have your wife dragged into an unpleasant police case. With that I can sympathise. But how then do you explain the presence of your wife’s handkerchief actually in the dead man’s compartment?”
“That handkerchief is not mine, Monsieur,” said the Countess.
“In spite of the initial H?”
“In spite of the initial. I have handkerchiefs not unlike that, but not one that is exactly of that pattern. I know, of course, that I cannot hope to make you believe me, but I assure you that it is so. That handkerchief is not mine.”
“It may have been placed there by someone in order to incriminate you?”
She smiled a little. “You are enticing me to admit that, after all, it is mine? But indeed, M. Poirot, it isn’t.” She spoke with great earnestness.
“Then why, if the handkerchief was not yours, did you alter the name in the passport?”
The Count answered this.
“Because we heard that a handkerchief had been found with the initial H on it. We talked the matter over together before we came to be interviewed. I pointed out to Helena that if it were seen that her Christian name began with an H she would immediately be subjected to much more rigorous questioning. And the thing was so simple—to alter Helena to Elena, was easily done.”
“You have, M. le Comte, the makings of a very fine criminal,” remarked Poirot dryly. “A great natural ingenuity, and an apparently remorseless determination to mislead justice.”
“Oh, no, no.” The girl leaned forward. “M. Poirot, he’s explained to you how it was.” She broke from French into English. “I was scared—absolutely dead scared, you understand. It had been so awful—that time—and to have it all raked up again. And to be suspected and perhaps thrown into prison. I was just scared stiff, M. Poirot. Can’t you understand at all?”
Her voice was lovely—deep—rich—pleading, the voice of the daughter of Linda Arden the actress.
Poirot looked gravely at her.
“If I am to believe you, Madame—and I do not say that I will not believe you—then you must help me.”
“Help you?”
“Yes. The reason for the murder lies in the past—in that tragedy which broke up your home and saddened your young life. Take me back into the past, Mademoiselle, that I may find there the link that explains the whole thing.”
“What can there be to tell you? They are all dead.” She repeated mournfully: “All dead—all dead—Robert, Sonia—darling, darling Daisy. She was so sweet—so happy—she had such lovely curls. We were all just crazy about her.”
“There was another victim, Madame. An indirect victim, you might say.”
“Poor Susanne? Yes, I had forgotten about her. The police questioned her. They were convinced that she had something to do with it. Perhaps she had—but if so only innocently. She had, I believe, chatted idly with someone, giving information as to the time of Daisy’s outings. The poor thing got terribly wrought up—she thought she was being held responsible.” She shuddered. “She threw herself out of the window. Oh! it was horrible.”
She buried her face in her hands.
“What nationality was she, Madame?”
“She was French.”
“What was her last name?”
“It’s absurd, but I can’t remember—we all called her Susanne. A pretty, laughing girl. She was devoted to Daisy.”
“She was the nursery-maid, was she not?”
“Yes.”
“Who was the nurse?”
“She was a trained hospital nurse. Stengelberg her name was. She too was devoted to Daisy—and to my sister.”
“Now, Madame, I want you to think carefully before you answer this question. Have you, since you were on this train, seen anyone that you recognised?”
She stared at him. “I? No, no one at all.”
“What about Princess Dragomiroff?”
“Oh! her. I know her, of course. I thought you meant anyone—anyone from—from that time.”
“So I did, Madame. Now think carefully. Some years have passed, remember. The person might have altered his or her appearance.”
Helena pondered deeply. Then she said: “No—I am sure—there is no one.”
“You yourself—you were a young girl at the time—did you have no one to superintend your studies or to look after you?”
“Oh! yes, I had a dragon—a sort of governess to me and secretary to Sonia combined. She was English—or rather Scotch; a big red-haired woman.”
“What was her name?”
“Miss Freebody.”
“Young or old?”
“She seemed frightfully old to me. I suppose she couldn’t have been more than forty. Susanne, of course, used to look after my clothes and maid me.”
“And there were no other inmates of the house?”
“Only servants.”
“And you are certain, quite certain, Madame, that you have recognised no one on the train?”
She replied earnestly: “No one, Monsieur. No one at all.”
第四章　护照上的油迹
第四章　护照上的油迹             
    波洛和鲍克先生．大夫同坐一桌。
    到餐车来吃饭的人，都显得非常温和自制。他们很少说话。就连平时非常饶舌的哈伯德太太，也显得那么安静，当然。她嘴里一边嘀嘀咕咕，一边坐下：
    “我好象不什么。”她只是在瑞典太太和鼓励下，才吃了点送上来和东西。瑞典太太看来有照顾她和特别责任。
    饭菜上来之前，波洛住侍者领班的衣袖，小声地跟他说了几句。康斯坦丁对这些耳语猜得很准。他注意到，安德烈伯爵夫妇的饭菜总是最后一人个送上来，吃完饭，结账也故意拖延了。这样，伯爵夫妇就成了最后离开餐车的人。
    当他们站起身，朝门口走去时，波洛委快就站起来，跟上他们。
    “对不起，夫人，你的手帕掉了。”
    他向她递过一块很小的．织有字母的手帕。
    她接过手帕，看了一眼，然后又还给他。
    “你弄错了，先生，这不是我的。”
    “不是你的？你能肯定吗？”
    “肯定不是。先生。”
    “可是，夫人，手帕上有你名字的起首字母──Ｈ。”
    伯爵突然动了动。波洛不理他，眼睛直盯着伯爵夫人的脸。
    她一动不动地看着他，说：
    “我不明白，先生。我名字和起首字母是Ｅ•Ａ．。”
    “我可不这么想。你的名字不是爱琳娜，而是海琳娜•戈尔登伯格，琳达•阿登的小女儿──海琳娜•戈尔登伯格，阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹。”
    整个餐车一下子变得死一样沉寂。伯爵夫妇的脸都吓得跟死人一样苍白。波洛换了一种比较温和的口气说：“否认是没有用的。这是事实，是吗？”
    伯爵怒吼起来：“请问，先生，你有什么权利──”
    他的夫人打断了他，用她那小手捂住了他的嘴巴。
    “不鲁道夫。让我来说。继续否认这位先生所说的，是没有用的。我们还是坐下来，好好谈谈。”
    她的声音变了，虽然仍富有南方腔调，但是，突然变得更为清楚锋利。毫无疑问，是道道地地的美国音。
    伯爵沉默不语。他听从了他妻子的手势，两人都在波洛对面坐下。
    “你的话很对，先生，”伯爵夫人说，“我是海琳娜•戈尔登伯络，阿姆斯朗太太的妹妹。”
    “今天上午，你可没有告诉我这一事实，伯爵夫人。”
    “没有。”
    “事实上，你丈夫和你所说的一切，只不过是谎言而已。”
    “先生，”伯爵生气地喊了起来。
    “别生气，鲁道夫。波洛先生说的事实是很残酷的，但也是否认不了的。”
    “我很高兴，你能如此直言不讳地承认事实，夫人。那么，请你告诉我，你为什么要这样做，为什么要涂改你护照的教名？”
    “这完全是我做的。”伯爵插了进来。
    海琳娜平声静气地说：
    “当然，波洛先生，你能猜出我的理由──我们的理由。被害人是杀害我那小侄女的凶手，他害死了姐姐，捣碎了我姐夫的心。那是我最爱的三个人。他们就是我的家──我的一切！”
    她的声音充满了激情。她真是她母亲的女儿。那位著名演员的演出，她那情感的魅力曾经感动得无数观众失声落泪。
    她继续往下说，但平静多了。
    “整个车上，也许，我是唯一一个最有正当的杀他的动机的人。”
    “你没有杀他吗，夫人？”
    “我向你发誓，波洛先生，我丈夫知道我，也可发誓──尽管我最有可能杀他，可我连碰也没碰过那人。”
    “我也发誓，先生，”伯爵说，“我用名誉担保，昨天晚上，海琳娜一刻也没离开过包房。正如我说的，她服了一片安眠红。她是完全无罪的。”
    波洛看看这个，又看看那个。
    “用名誉担保。”伯爵又重复了一遍。
    波洛微微地摇了摇头。
    “那么，在护照上改名的，是你罗？”
    “波洛先生，”伯爵激动地说：“请想一想我的地位。你以为，我能让我的妻卷入一个令人厌恶的弄事案子吗？她可是无罪的，我知道。但她所说的，句句是事实──由于跟阿姆斯特朗家有关，她马上就会被怀疑的。她会被传讯，也许还会被逮捕。既然恶运使得我们跟雷切特同车，我感到，只有这个办法了。我承认，先生，上午我所说的全是假的，但是除了一点──我的妻子昨天晚上没有离开过包房。”
    他说得这么认真，令人难以否定。
    “我并没有说，我不相信你，先生。”波洛慢吞吞地说。“你的家族，我知道，是古老而值得自豪的。要是你的妻子卷入一个令人不快的刑事案子，这确是痛苦的。这一点，我倒很同情你。然而，你妻子的手帕，确实是在死者房里发现的，你对此，又作何解释呢？”
    “那块手帕不是我的，先生。”伯爵夫人说。
    “不管那上面有起首字母Ｈ吗？”
    “不管。虽说与我的手帕有点儿象，可不是那种式样。当然，我知道，我不指望你能相信我。可我向你保证，那块手帕不是我的。”
    “可能是有人为了连累你，把它放在那儿的？”
    她微微一笑。
    “可是，毕竟，你还是在诱使我承认，它是我的？但事实上，波洛先生，它不是我的。”
    她说话时，态度非常认真。
    “假如手帕不是你的，那么，你为什么要涂改护照上的名字呢？”
    伯爵回答了这个问题。
    “因为我们听到，手帕上的起首字母是Ｈ。我们在被传问之前，商量了此事。我向海琳娜指出，要是她的教名的起首字母被人发现的话，她马上就会受到更多更严厉的盘问。而这事，把海琳娜改成爱琳娜，又是如此容易因此，就改了护照。”
    “你做得跟出色的罪犯一样高明，伯爵先生，”波洛冷冷地说，“一个伟大、天才的创造，并且，毫不悔恨地决心把正义引入歧途。”
    “噢，不，不。”那女人向前靠了靠，用法语说，“波洛先生，他是向你解释事情的经过。”她停了一下，改用英语说：“我害怕──我怕极了，你是知道的。我真怕──那时──重新提起那过去的惨景。一想到可能会被怀疑，甚至投入监狱，波洛先生，我简直怕死了。你难道一点也不能理解吗？”
    她的声音是动人的──深沉的──富有感情的──恳求似的，正是那位演员琳达•阿登的女儿的声音。
    波洛严肃地看着她。
    “假如我相信你，夫人──我并不是说，我不相信你──你行帮助我。”
    “帮你？”
    “是的。谋杀的原因，应该溯源到过去──那个悲剧毁了你的家，使你少女时代的生活变得充满辛酸。告诉我那时的惨状吧，夫人。那样，我可以从中找出解释整个案情的来龙去脉。”
    “有什么好说的呢？他们都死了。”她痛苦地重复着，“都死了──都死了，罗伯特，索妮娅──亲爱、亲爱的黛西。她是多么美啊──多么幸福──她的鬈发是多么可爱啊。她的失踪，简直使我们所有的人都要发狂了。”
    “还有一个受害者，夫人。一个间接受害者，你可以说。”
    “可怜的苏珊？是的，我几乎把她给忘了。警察审问了她，他们确信，她与案子有些关系。也许有──但是，即使有，也是无罪的。我相信，当时，她是跟别人闲聊，说出了黛西的假日时间。可怜的人儿，激动得可怕──她以为黛西的失踪全是她的责任。”说着，她战栗起来。“她就从窗口跳了下去，嗬，太可怕了。”
    她用双手捂住了脸。
    “她是哪国人，夫人？”
    “法国人。”
    “她姓什么？”
    “有些荒唐，可我记不起来──我们都叫她苏珊，一个漂亮、爱笑的姑娘。她对黛西一片忠心。”
    “她是保姆，是吗？”
    “是的。”
    “谁是护士？”
    “她是个训练有素的医院护士。她的名字叫斯坦格尔伯格。她对黛西──对我姐姐也是一片忠心。”
    “现在，夫人，我要你在回答这个问题之前，仔细想一想。自从你上车以来，有没有看到过任何一个你所认识的人？”
    她呆呆地望着他。
    “我吗？没有，一个也没有。”
    “德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人，你认识吗？”
    “噢，她吗？当然认识。我以为你指的是那时的──那时的──任何人。”
    “是这个意思，夫人。现在可得仔细想想罗。要记住，好多年过去了。这个人可能已经改变了模样。”
    海琳娜陷入了沉思。然后，她说：
    “没有──我相信──没有我认识的人。”
    “你自己──你那时还是个女孩子──难道没有人管你的学习，或是照料你的生活吗？”
    “噢，对了，我一个严厉的监护人──象是我的家庭女教师，同是，又是索妮亚的秘书，她是英国人，确切地说是苏格兰人──一个高大的红发女人。”
    “她的名字呢？”
    “弗里波蒂小姐。”
    “年老的还是年轻的。”
    “对我来说，她看上去老得可怕。我想，实际上她还没有超过四十岁。苏珊，当然，常常照料我的衣着和服侍我。”
    “那座房子里，难道就没有其他人了吗？”
    “只有佣人。”
    “那么，你肯定──十分肯定，夫人──车上的人，你没有一个认识的罗？”
    她认真地回答：
    “没有，先生，一个也没有。”
5 THE CHRISTIAN NAME OF PRINCESS DRAGOMIROFF
5 THE CHRISTIAN NAME OF PRINCESS DRAGOMIROFF
When the Count and Countess had departed, Poirot looked across at the other two.
“You see,” he said “we make progress.”
“Excellent work,” said M. Bouc cordially. “On my part, I should never have dreamed of suspecting Count and Countess Andrenyi. I will admit I thought them quite hors de combat. I suppose there is no doubt that she committed the crime? It is rather sad. Still, they will not guillotine her. There are extenuating circumstances. A few years’ imprisonment—that will be all.”
“In fact you are quite certain of her guilt.”
“My dear friend—surely there is no doubt of it? I thought your reassuring manner was only to smooth things over till we are dug out of the snow and the police take charge.”
“You do not believe the Count’s positive assertion—on his word of honor—that his wife is innocent?”
“Mon cher—naturally—what else could he say? He adores his wife. He wants to save her! He tells his lie very well—quite in the grand seigneur manner. But what else than a lie could it be?”
“Well, you know, I had the preposterous idea that it might be the truth.”
“No, no. The handkerchief, remember. The handkerchief clinches the matter.”
“Oh, I am not so sure about the handkerchief. You remember, I always told you that there were two possibilities as to the ownership of the handkerchief.”
“All the same—”
M. Bouc broke off. The door at the end had opened, and Princess Dragomiroff entered the dining-car. She came straight to them and all three men rose to their feet.
She spoke to Poirot, ignoring the others.
“I believe, Monsieur,” she said, “that you have a handkerchief of mine.”
Poirot shot a glance of triumph at the other two.
“Is this it, Madame?”
He produced the little square of fine cambric.
“That is it. It has my initial in the corner.”
“But, Madame la Princesse, that is the letter H,” said M. Bouc. “Your Christian name—pardon me—is Natalia.”
She gave him a cold stare.
“That is correct, Monsieur. My handkerchiefs are always initialled in the Russian characters. H is N in Russian.”
M. Bouc was somewhat taken aback. There was something about this indomitable old lady which made him feel flustered and uncomfortable.
“You did not tell us that this handkerchief was yours at the inquiry this morning.”
“You did not ask me,” said the Princess drily.
“Pray be seated, Madame,” said Poirot.
She sighed. “I may as well, I suppose.” She sat down.
“You need not make a long business of this, Messieurs.”
Your next question will be—How did my handkerchief come to be lying by a murdered man’s body! My reply to that is that I have no idea.”
“You have really no idea?”
“None whatever.”
“You will excuse me, Madame, but how much can we rely upon the truthfulness of your replies?”
Poirot said the words very softly.
Princess Dragomiroff answered contemptuously. “I suppose you mean because I did not tell you that Helena Andrenyi was Mrs. Armstrong’s sister?”
“In fact you deliberately lied to us in the matter.”
“Certainly. I would do the same again. Her mother was my friend. I believe, Messieurs, in loyalty—to one’s friends and one’s family and one’s caste.”
“You do not believe in doing your utmost to further the ends of justice?”
“In this case I consider that justice—strict justice—has been done.”
Poirot leaned forward.
“You see my difficulty, Madame. In this matter of the handkerchief, even, am I to believe you? Or are you shielding your friend’s daughter?”
“Oh! I see what you mean.” Her face broke into a grim smile. “Well, Messieurs, this statement of mine can be easily proved. I will give you the address of the people in Paris who make my handkerchiefs. You have only to show them the one in question and they will inform you that it was made to my order over a year ago. The handkerchief is mine, Messieurs.”
She rose.
“Have you anything further you wish to ask me?”
“Your maid, Madame, did she recognise this handkerchief when we showed it to her this morning?”
“She must have done so. She saw it and said nothing? Ah, well, that shows that she too can be loyal.”
With a slight inclination of her head she passed out of the dining-car.
“So that was it,” murmured Poirot softly. “I noticed just a trifling hesitation when I asked the maid if she knew to whom the handkerchief belonged. She was uncertain whether or not to admit that it was her mistress’s. But how does that fit in with that strange central idea of mine? Yes, it might well be.”
“Ah!” said M. Bouc with a characteristic gesture. “She is a terrible old lady, that!”
“Could she have murdered Ratchett?” asked Poirot of the doctor.
He shook his head.
“Those blows—the ones delivered with great force penetrating the muscle—never, never could anyone with so frail a physique inflict them.”
“But the feebler ones?”
“The feebler ones, yes.”
“I am thinking,” said Poirot, “of the incident this morning when I said to her that the strength was in her will rather than in her arm. It was in the nature of a trap, that remark. I wanted to see if she would look down at her right or her left arm. She did neither. She looked at them both. But she made a strange reply. She said, ‘No, I have no strength in these. I do not know whether to be sorry or glad.’ A curious remark that. It confirms me in my belief about the crime.”
“It did not settle the point about the left-handedness.”
“No. By the way, did you notice that Count Andrenyi keeps his handkerchief in his right-hand breast pocket?”
M. Bouc shook his head. His mind reverted to the astonishing revelations of the last half-hour. He murmured:
“Lies—and again lies. It amazes me, the number of lies we had told to us this morning.”
“There are more still to discover,” said Poirot cheerfully.
“You think so?”
“I shall be very much disappointed if it is not so.”
“Such duplicity is terrible,” said M. Bouc. “But it seems to please you,” he added reproachfully.
“It has this advantage,” said Poirot. “If you confront anyone who has lied with the truth, he will usually admit it—often out of sheer surprise. It is only necessary to guess right to produce your effect.
“That is the only way to conduct this case. I select each passenger in turn, consider his or her evidence, and say to myself, ‘If so and so is lying, on what point is he lying, and what is the reason for the lie?’ And I answer, ‘If he is lying—if, you mark—it could only be for such a reason and on such a point.’ We have done that once very successfully with Countess Andrenyi. We shall now proceed to try the same method on several other persons.”
“And supposing, my friend, that your guess happens to be wrong?”
“Then one person, at any rate, will be completely freed from suspicion.”
“Ah!—a process of elimination.”
“Exactly.”
“And whom do we tackle next?”
“We are going to tackle that pukka sahib, Colonel Arbuthnot.”
第五章　公爵夫人的教名
第五章　公爵夫人的教名             
    伯爵夫妇走了。波洛朝他的朋友看了看。
    “你们看，”他说，“我们又前进了一大步。”
    “好极了，”鲍克先生真心诚意地说：“要是我，做梦也不会怀疑到安德烈伯爵夫妇的。我承认，我以为他们完全是无关的。现在我想，肯定是她作的案。这是相当惨的。不过，她是不会被推到断头台上去的。她有减刑的条件。最多也就是坐上几年监牢──最多如此。”
    “其实，你是非常相信，她是有罪的？”
    “我亲爱的朋友，这真是毫无疑问了吗？我想，你那自信的样子，好像是说，等到列车排除了雪堆，就把这个案子移交给警察，我们就可以旗息鼓了。”
    “你不相信伯爵明确地断言──以他的名誉担保──他妻子是无罪的吗？”
    “我亲爱的──自然──他还有什么可说的呢？他喜欢他妻子。他想救她！他们很会撒谎──一副贵族的气派，然而，除了谎言，还有什么可说的呢？”
    “呃，你知道，我有个相反的意见──他说的可能是事实。”
    “不对，不对。不要忘了这块手帕。单凭这块手帕就足以说明问题了。”
    “哦，对手帕，我可不那么相信。你可记得，我一直提醒你，关于手帕的主人有两种可能。”
    “尽管如此──”
    鲍克先生的话还没有说完。此时，餐车的门被打开，德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人走了进来。
她径直朝他们走去，三个人都站起来。
    她只对波洛说话，把其他两人丢在一边，不予理睬。
    “我相信，先生，”她说，“你这儿有一块我的手帕。”
    波洛身他的朋友瞥了一眼，眼神里流露出胜利的喜悦。
    “是这块吗，夫人？”
    他拿出那一块细棉布手帕。
    “就是它。角落上有我的起首字母。”
    “可是，公爵夫人，这儿的字母是Ｈ，”鲍克先生说，“而你的教名──请原谅──是娜塔莉娅（Ｎａｔａｌｉａ）”
    她冷冷地看了他一眼。
    “对，先生。我手帕上的起首字母总是俄语的。Ｈ在俄语中的发音是Ｎ。”
    鲍克先生有点儿木然，这个倔强的老太婆身上，有种什么东西使他感到惊恐和不安。
    “今天上午，跟你会见的时候，你可没告诉我们，这手帕是你的。”
    “你并没有问我。”公爵夫人冷冰冰地说。
    “请坐下，夫人。”波洛说。
    她叹了口气。
    “我想，可以。”
    她坐了下来。
    “此事用着花多长的时间，先生们，你们的下一个问题将是──你的手帕，怎么会落在尸体旁边呢？对于这个问题，我的回答是，我不知道。”
    “真的不知道？”
    “一点儿也不知道。”
    “请原谅，夫人。可我们怎么相信，你的回答是真实的呢？”
    波洛非常柔和地说。德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人轻蔑地答道：
    “我想，你所指的是，因为我没有告诉你们，海琳娜•安德烈是阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹吗？”
    “事实上，你在这件事上，有意骗了我们。”
    “很对，我还会这样做。她母亲是我的朋友。我认为，我是忠实的──忠于朋友，忠于家，忠于阶级。”
    “你不认为，你该尽力促使本案得到公正的解决吗？”
    “这个案子，我认为，已经得到了公正的──严格的──解决。”
    波洛向前凑过去。
    “你明白我的难处，夫人。甚至在手帕这事上，我会相信你吗？或者，你是不是在庇护你朋友的女儿呢？”
    “啊！我明白你的意思。”她的脸上露出了狞笑。“吧，先生，我的话很容易被证实。
这就给你们地址，绣我手帕的巴黎人的地址。你们只要出示一下你们手中的手帕，他们就会告诉你们，这是我一年多以前就定做的。手帕是我的，先生们。”
    她站起身。
    “你们还有什么要问的？”
    “你的女佣人，夫人，今天上午我们给她看手帕时，她应该认得出来吗？”
    “她一定认出来了。她看到它，但什么也没说，啊，她，这正表明，她也是忠实的。”
    她微微点了点头，穿过餐车而去。
    “正是这样。”波洛低声说，“当我问那女佣人手帕是谁的时候，她有点儿犹豫不决。
她决定不下，是否应该承认，手帕是她女主人的。然面，这又如何能符合我那奇怪而主要的想法呢？是的，也许真的会符合的。”
    “啊！”鲍克先生说着，习惯地做了个手势──“她是个可怕的老太婆，可怕的。”
    “她有可能谋杀雷切特吗？”大夫问波洛。
    他摇摇头。
    “那些刀伤──深入肌肉的刀伤──决不是年老体弱的人干得了的。”
    “可那些浅一点的呢？”
    “对，那些浅一点的。”
    “我正在考虑，”波洛说，“今天上午的事，我对她说，力量不在她的手臂上，而在于她的意志。这话实际上是个圈套。我想观察一下，她会低头去看她的右臂呢还是左臂。然而，她的回答挺奇怪。她说：‘不，我的两只手都没有力气，我不知道，是难过还是高兴。’多怪的说法。它使我更加相信，我对本案的一些看法。”
    “可这并没有解决左撇子的问题。”
    “没有，顺便问一下，你们有没有注意到，安德烈伯爵的手帕是放在上衣右胸口袋里的？”
    鲍克先生摇摇头。他回想起来，在过去半个钟头里，案情的揭示是多么令人惊讶，多么意想不到。他含糊其辞地说：“谎言──还是谎言──实在令人吃惊，整整一上午的谎言。”
    “还有更多的秘密需要揭露。”波洛高兴地说。
    “你是这样想的吗？”
    “假如不是这样的话，我将非常失望。”
    “这种欺骗太可怕了，”鲍克先生说，“可是，看来你倒高兴。”他补一句，有点儿责备的样子。
    “假话有假话的好处，”波洛说，“假如你以真相与一个说假话的人对质，通常，他们是会承认的──而且往往是出其不意的。只要你的推测正确，就有效果。”
    “这是处理这件案子的唯上方法。我轮流唤来每个旅客，细想他们的证词，自己对自己说，‘假如这样，那就是撒谎，在哪一点上撒谎呢？撒谎的原因呢？’于是，我就有了回答，假如他们在撒谎──假如，你们听着──只能是为了这个原因以及在这一点上撒谎。这个办法，在伯爵夫人身上，很奏效。现在，我们将用同样的办法来对付其他儿的人。”
    “万一，我的朋友，你的推测刚好是错的呢？”
    “那么，不管怎样，这个人就再有嫌疑了。”
    “啊！你用的是排除法。”
    “完全正确。”
    “那么，下一个，我们将对付哪个？”
    “那位真正的绅士，阿巴思诺特上校。”
6 A SECOND INTERVIEW WITH COLONEL ARBUTHNOT
6 A SECOND INTERVIEW WITH COLONEL ARBUTHNOT
Colonel Arbuthnot was clearly annoyed at being summoned to the dining-car for a second interview. His face wore a most forbidding expression as he sat down and said:
“Well?”
“All my apologies for troubling you a second time,” said Poirot. “But there is still some information that I think you might be able to give us.”
“Indeed? I hardly think so.”
“To begin with, you see this pipe-cleaner?”
“Yes.”
“Is it one of yours?”
“Don’t know. I don’t put a private mark on them, you know.”
“Are you aware, Colonel Arbuthnot, that you are the only man amongst the passengers in the Stamboul-Calais carriage who smokes a pipe?”
“In that case it probably is one of mine.”
“Do you know where it was found?”
“Not the least idea.”
“It was found by the body of the murdered man.”
Colonel Arbuthnot raised his eyebrows.
“Can you tell us, Colonel Arbuthnot, how it is likely to have got there?”
“If you mean, did I drop it there myself, no, I didn’t.”
“Did you go into Mr. Ratchett’s compartment at any time?”
“I never even spoke to the man.”
“You never spoke to him and you did not murder him?”
The colonel’s eyebrows went up again sardonically.
“If I had, I should hardly be likely to acquaint you with the fact. As a matter of fact I didn’t murder the fellow.”
“Ah, well,” murmured Poirot. “It is of no consequence.”
“I beg your pardon?”
“I said that it was of no consequence.”
“Oh!” Arbuthnot looked taken aback. He eyed Poirot uneasily.
“Because, you see,” continued the little man, “the pipe-cleaner, it is of no importance. I can myself think of eleven other excellent explanations of its presence.”
Arbuthnot stared at him.
“What I really wished to see you about was quite another matter,” went on Poirot. “Miss Debenham may have told you, perhaps, that I overheard some words spoken to you at the station of Konya?”
Arbuthnot did not reply.
“She said, ‘Not now. When it’s all over. When it’s behind us!’ Do you know to what those words referred?”
“I am sorry, M. Poirot, but I must refuse to answer that question.”
“Pourquoi?”
The Colonel said stiffly, “I suggest that you ask Miss Debenham herself for the meaning of those words.”
“I have done so.”
“And she refused to tell you?”
“Yes.”
“Then I should think it would have been perfectly plain—even to you—that my lips are sealed.”
“You will not give away a lady’s secret?”
“You can put it that way, if you like.”
“Miss Debenham told me that they referred to a private matter of her own.”
“Then why not accept her word for it?”
“Because, Colonel Arbuthnot, Miss Debenham is what one might call a highly suspicious character.”
“Nonsense,” said the Colonel with warmth.
“It is not nonsense.”
“You have nothing whatever against her.”
“Not the fact that Miss Debenham was companion governess; in the Armstrong household at the time of the kidnapping of little Daisy Armstrong?”
There was a minute’s dead silence.
Poirot nodded his head gently.
“You see,” he said. “We know more than you think. If Miss Debenham is innocent, why did she conceal that fact? Why did she tell me that she had never been in America?”
The Colonel cleared his throat. “Aren’t you possibly making a mistake?”
“I am making no mistake. Why did Miss Debenham lie to me?”
Colonel Arbuthnot shrugged his shoulders. “You had better ask her. I still think that you are wrong.”
Poirot raised his voice and called. One of the restaurant attendants came from the far end of the car.
“Go and ask the English lady in No. 11 if she will be good enough to come here.”
“Bien, Monsieur.”
The man departed. The four men sat in silence. Colonel Arbuthnot’s face looked as though it were carved out of wood, rigid and impassive.
The man returned.
“The lady is just coming, Monsieur.”
“Thank you.”
A minute or two later Mary Debenham entered the dining-car.
第六章　再次会见上校
第六章　再次会见上校             
    阿巴思诺特上校显然十分生气，因为波洛要他到餐车进行第二次会晤。他脸上的表情令人生畏。他坐下来，问道：
    “是你们要我来的？”
    “很抱歉，再一次打扰你，”波洛说，“但是，还有些情况，我想，你是能够提供给我们的。”
    “真的？我简直没想到。”
    “首先，你见过这根烟斗通条吗？”
    “见过。”
    “是你的吗？”
    “不知道。我没有在上面做私人记号，你知道。”
    “你知道吗，阿巴思诺特上校在伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢上的旅客里，你是唯一用烟斗的人？”
    “如此说来，有可能是我的。”
    “你知道这是在哪发现的吗？”
    “一点也不知道。”
    “这是在被害人的尸体旁边发现的。”
    阿巴思诺特上校扬了扬眉毛。
    “你能告诉我们，上校，它怎么可能到哪里去的呢？”
    “如果你意思是，问我本人有没有把通条掉在那儿，那么，我可以告诉你，没有。”
    “任何时候，你都没进过雷切特的包房吗？”
    “甚至从来没跟他讲过话。”
    “你从来没跟他讲过话，就没有谋杀过他？”
    上校又嘲弄地扬扬眉毛。
    “要是那样的话，我就不会给你提供事实罗。可事实上，我并没有谋杀过那家伙。”
    “唔，好了，”波洛含糊地说，“那是无关紧要的。”
    “你说什么？”
    “我说，那是无关紧要的。”
    “啊！”阿巴思诺特上校看来好象吃了一惊。他不安地瞧着波洛。
    “因此，你看，”波洛接着说，“通条本身，是不重要的。对于通条的出现，我还能想出另外十一种高明的解释。”
    阿巴思诺特上校的眼睛直楞楞地盯着他。
    “我想会见你的真正目的，完全是另一回事。”波洛继续往下说，“也许，德贝汉小姐已经告诉了你，在康尼雅车站，我碰巧听到有人对你说了些什么？”
    阿巴思诺特上校没有回答。
    “她说，‘现在不行。等那事会部结束。等那事情过去之后。’这些话是什么意思，你知道吗？”
    “可是，很遗憾，波洛先生，我必须拒绝回答这个问题。”
    “为什么呢？”
    上校生硬地说：“至于那些话的意思，我认为，你应该去问德贝汉小姐本人。”
    “我已经问过了。”
    “这么说，她拒绝告诉你罗？”
    “是的。”
    “那么，我想，事情十分清楚──即使对你──我也不会说出一个字的。”
    “你是不愿泄漏一个姑娘的秘密吗？”
    “你可以这样想，要是你愿意。”
    “德贝汉小姐告诉我，那些话是她的私事。”
    “那么，你为什么不接受这个解释呢？”
    “因为，德贝汉小姐是个非常值得怀疑的人，阿巴思诺特上校。”
    “胡说八道。”上校激动地说。
    “这可不是胡说八道。”
    “你没有理由怀疑她。”
    “小黛西被拐时，德贝汉小姐正好是阿姆思特朗家的一个家庭教师，这难道不是怀疑她的理由吗？”
    餐车里突然一片寂静。
    波洛温和地点点头。
    “你看，”他说，“我们知道的，比你想的还要多。假如德贝汉小姐是无罪的，她为什么还有隐瞒这一事实呢？为什么她告诉我，她从来没到过美国呢？”
    上校清了清嗓子。
    “也许你正犯了个错误？”
    “没错。为什么要对我说谎呢？”
    阿巴思诺特上校耸了耸肩膀。
    “你还是自己去问她吧，我仍旧认为，你错了。”
    波洛提高嗓门唤人。一个餐车侍者从远处的门外走进来。
    “去问问十一号铺的英国小姐，是否愿意到这儿来一下。”
    “好的，先生。”
    餐车侍者走了。四个人都一声不响地坐着。上校的脸好象是泥塑木雕似的，僵直呆板，毫无表情。
    侍者回来了。
    “那位小姐马上就到，先生。”
    “谢谢你。”
    一、二分钟后，玛丽•德贝汉走进了餐车。
7 THE IDENTITY OF MARY DEBENHAM
7 THE IDENTITY OF MARY DEBENHAM
She wore no hat. Her head was thrown back as though in defiance. “The sweep of her hair back from her face, the curve of her nostril suggested the figure-head of a ship plunging gallantly into a rough sea. In that moment she was beautiful.
Her eyes went to Arbuthnot for a minute—just a minute. She said to Poirot, “You wished to see me?”
“I wished to ask you, Mademoiselle, why you lied to us this morning?”
“Lied to you? I don’t know what you mean.”
“You concealed the fact that at the time of the Armstrong tragedy you were actually living in the house. You told me that you had never been in America.”
He saw her flinch for a moment and then recover herself.
“Yes,” she said. “That is true.”
“No, Mademoiselle, it was false.”
“You misunderstood me. I mean that it is true that I lied to you.”
“Ah, you admit it?”
Her lips curved into a smile. “Certainly, since you have found me out.”
“You are at least frank, Mademoiselle.”
“There does not seem anything else for me to be.”
“Well, of course, that is true. And now, Mademoiselle, may I ask you the reason for these evasions?”
“I should have thought the reason leapt to the eye, M. Poirot.”
“It does not leap to mine, Mademoiselle.”
She said in a quiet even voice with a trace of hardness in it, “I have my living to get.”
“You mean—?”
She raised her eyes and looked him full in the face. “How much do you know, M. Poirot, of the fight to get and keep decent employment? Do you think that a girl who had been detained in connection with a murder case, whose name and perhaps photograph were reproduced in the English papers—do you think that any nice ordinary middle-class woman would want to engage that girl as governess to her daughters?”
“I do not see why not—if no blame attached to you.”
“Oh, blame—it is not blame—it is the publicity! So far, M. Poirot, I have succeeded in life. I have had well-paid, pleasant posts. I was not going to risk the position I had attained when no good end could have been served.”
“I will venture to suggest, Mademoiselle, that I would have been the best judge of that, not you.”
She shrugged her shoulders.
“For instance, you could have helped me in the matter of identification.”
“What do you mean?”
“Is it possible, Mademoiselle, that you did not recognise in the Countess Andrenyi, Mrs. Armstrong’s young sister whom you taught in New York?”
“Countess Andrenyi? No.” She shook her head. “It may seem extraordinary to you—but I did not recognise her. She was not grown up, you see, when I knew her. That was over three years ago. It is true that the Countess reminded me of someone; it puzzled me. But she looks so foreign—I never connected her with the little American schoolgirl. I only glanced at her casually when coming into the restaurant car, and I noticed her clothes more than her face.” She smiled faintly. “Women do! And then—well—I had my own preoccupations.”
“You will not tell me your secret, Mademoiselle?”
Poirot’s voice was very gentle and persuasive.
She said in a low voice, “I can’t—I can’t.”
And suddenly, without warning, she broke down, dropping her face down upon her outstretched arms and crying as though her heart would break.
The Colonel sprang up and stood awkwardly beside her.
“I—look here—”
He stopped and turning round scowled fiercely at Poirot.
“I’ll break every bone in your damned body, you dirty little whipper-snapper,” he said.
“Monsieur,” protested M. Bouc.
Arbuthnot had turned back to the girl. “Mary—for God’s sake—”
She sprang up. “It’s nothing. I’m all right. You don’t need me any more, do you, M. Poirot? If you do, you must come and find me. Oh, what an idiot—what an idiot I’m making of myself!” She hurried out of the car.
Arbuthnot, before following her, turned once more on Poirot.
“Miss Debenham’s got nothing to do with this business—nothing, do you hear? And if she’s worried and interfered with, you’ll have me to deal with.” He strode out.
“I like to see an angry Englishman,” said Poirot. “They are very amusing. The more emotional they feel, the less command they have of language.”
But M. Bouc was not interested in the emotional reactions of Englishmen. He was overcome by admiration of his friend.
“Mon cher, vous êtes épatant!” he cried. “Another miraculous guess.”
“It is incredible how you think of these things,” said Dr. Constantine admiringly.
“Oh, I claim no credit this time. It was not a guess. Countess Andrenyi practically told me.”
“Comment? Surely not?”
“You remember, I asked her about her governess or companion? I had already decided in my mind that if Mary Debenham were mixed up in the matter, she must have figured in the household in some such capacity.”
“Yes, but the Countess Andrenyi described a totally different person.”
“Exactly. A tall middle-aged woman with red hair—in fact, the exact opposite in every respect of Miss Debenham, so much so as to be quite remarkable. But then she had to invent a name quickly, and there it was that the unconscious association of ideas gave her away. She said, Miss Freebody, you remember.”
“Yes?”
“Eh bien, you may not know it, but there is a shop in London that was called until recently Debenham & Freebody. With the name Debenham running in her head, the Countess clutches at another name quickly, and the first that comes is Freebody. Naturally I understood immediately.”
“That is yet another lie. Why did she do it?’
“Possibly more loyalty. It makes things a little difficult.”
“Ma foi!” said M. Bouc with violence. “But does everybody on this train tell lies?”
“That,” said Poirot, “is what we are about to find out.”
第七章　玛丽·德贝汉的身份
第七章　玛丽•德贝汉的身份             
    她没有戴帽子。她的头，挑衅似地身后仰了仰。她那波浪形的长发和鼻子的曲线，使人联想起一艘船的船头，在波涛汹涌的大海上，勇敢地劈浪前进。而在这刹那间，她是美的。
    她向阿巴思诺特上校看了一眼──就这一眼。
    她对波洛说：“你想要见我？”
    “我想问你，小姐，今天上午，你为什么要对我们撒谎？”
    “对你们撒谎？我不懂你的意思。”
    “你隐瞒了这样一个事实，在阿姆斯特朗惨案发生时，你确是住在他家的。可你告诉我，你从来都没有到过美国。”
    他看她向后缩了一下，很快又镇静下来。
    “是的，”她说，“这是真的。”
    “不，小姐，是假的。”
    “你误解我话的意思了。我是说，我对你撒了谎，这是真的。”
    “啊，你承认了。”
    “当然承认。既然你已经发觉了。”
    “至少你是坦率的，小姐。”
    “我好象不会是另外一种人。”
    “嗯，这当然是事实。现在，小姐，我可以问问你撒谎的原因吗？”
    “我这原因不明显吗，波洛先生？”
    “对我可不明显，小姐。”
    她用文静，平稳，有点儿生硬的声音说：“我要活下去，我得干活。”
    “你的意思是──？”
    她抬起双眼，目光停留在波洛的脸上。
    “你知道，波洛先生。要得到并保持一个体面的工作，是多么艰难啊？你认为一个因为与谋杀有牵连的曾被拘留过的姑娘，一个名字也许还有照片被登在英国报纸上的姑娘──你认为，还会有哪儿个曾通中产阶级的英国女人，要这样的姑娘做她女儿的家庭教师呢？”
    “我看不出为什么不会──假如你没有责任的话。”
    “噢，责任──这不是责任──是名声问题，到目前为止，我的生活道路是顺利的。我的工作报酬不错，又令人愉快。要是没有更吸引人的好处，我不会冒着失去现有工作的危险去干任何事的。”
    “我要冒昧提醒你，小姐，不是你，而是我，是最好的裁判。”
    她耸耸肩。
    “比如说，你能帮助我解决你们的身份问题。”
    “这是什么意思？”
    “小姐，你还能认出，安德烈伯爵夫人，就是你在纽约教过的阿姆斯特朗太太的妹妹吗？”
    “安德烈伯爵夫人？认不出，”她摇摇头，“你也许觉得奇怪，可我不认识她。你知道，我教她时，她还未成年呢那是三年多前的事，的确，伯爵夫人使我想起了某个人──这事使我迷惑不解。但是，她看上去，多么象个外国人──我怎么也不敢把她和那个小小的美国女学生联系起来的。确实，走进餐车时，我曾漫不经心地瞥了她一眼，我更多地注意她的衣服，而不是脸──”她露出一丝微笑──“女人总是这样！况且，嗯，我有我自己的事要干。”
    “你还是不愿告诉我你的秘密，小姐？”
    波洛的声音很温柔，但有说明力。
    她轻轻地说：
    “我不能──我不能。”
    突然，谁也没想到，她情不自禁地痛哭起来，整个脸都扑在向前伸出的手臂里，伤心得好象心都要碎了。
    上校跳起来，样子可怕地站在她身旁。
    “我──你们看──”
    他停住了，转过身子，恶狠狠地怒视着波洛。
    “我要砸你个稀巴烂，你这个卑鄙的矮鬼。”他说。
    “先生。”鲍克先生抗议道。
    阿巴思诺特上校转向姑娘。
    “玛丽──看在上帝的份上──”
    她跳了起来。
    “没什么。我很好，你不再需要我了，波洛先生，是吗？如果你需要，你可以来找我。
啊！多傻──我多么傻啊！”
    她匆匆跑出了餐车。阿巴思诺特上校在跟她走之前，又转过身来，看看波洛，喊道：
“德贝汉小姐跟这个案子毫不相干──毫不相干，你听到吗？如果你还要找她的麻烦，就尽管来找我吧！”
    他大跨步走了出去。
    “我喜欢看一个愤怒的英国人，”波洛说，“他们是很逗人乐的。越是感情冲动，说起话来就越失去控制。”
    然而，鲍克先生对英国人的冲动反应并不感兴趣。他对他的朋友波洛，佩服得五体投地。
    “我亲爱的，你真了不起。”他欢呼起来，“又一奇迹般的猜测。实在惊人。”
    “你对这些事是怎么想出来的，简直不能令人置信。”大夫赞赏地说。
    “哦，这次可不值得称赞，这不是猜想，实际上是安德烈伯爵夫人告诉我的。”
    “你不是在开玩笑吧？”鲍克先生怀疑地说。
    “你们还记得吗，我问到她的家庭女教师时和伴侣吗？那时，我就想到假如德贝汉小姐跟本案有牵连，她在阿姆斯特朗家不是家庭教师，就是女伴。”
    “可是，安德烈伯爵夫人描述的，却是一个完全不同的人。”
    “一点不错，一个高高的，红头发的中年女妇人──其实，在各方面，都和德贝汉小姐相反。这样说，是为了造成一个明显和差别。然而，当时，她不得不马上造个假名，而有些不自觉的联系，使她露出了马脚。你们一定记得，她说的是弗里波蒂小姐。”
    “是吗？”
    “嗨，你们也许不知道，在伦敦，有爿店的店名也叫弗里波蒂，最近才改成德贝汉•弗里波蒂。由于伯爵夫人的脑子里一直转着德贝汉小姐这个名字，所以她很快就联想到另一个，嘴巴说出来的就成了弗里波蒂。自然，我马上就明白了。”
    “又是一个谎言，她为什么要这样呢？”
    “可能是为了更为忠实吧。给破案添些麻烦。”
    “我的天，”鲍克先生大声说。“但是，车上的每个人都在撒谎吗？”
    “这就是，”波洛说，“我们马上要把它弄明白。”
8 FURTHER SURPRISING REVELATIONS
8 FURTHER SURPRISING REVELATIONS
“Nothing would surprise me now,” said M. Bouc.
“Nothing! Even if everybody in the train proved to have been in the Armstrong household, I should not express surprise.”
“That is a very profound remark,” said Poirot. “Would you like to see what your favorite suspect, the Italian, has to say for himself?”
“You are going to make another of these famous guesses of yours?”
“Precisely.”
“It is really a most extraordinary case,” said Constantine.
“No, it is most natural.”
M. Bouc flung up his arms in comic despair. “If this is what you call natural, mon ami—” Words failed him.
Poirot had by this time requested the dining-car attendant to fetch Antonio Foscarelli.
The big Italian had a wary look in his eye as he came in. He shot nervous glances from side to side like a trapped animal.
“What do you want!” he said. “I have nothing more to tell you—nothing, do you hear? Per Dio—” He struck his hand on the table.
“Yes, you have something more to tell us,” said Poirot firmly. “The truth!”
“The truth?” He shot an uneasy glance at Poirot. All the assurance and geniality had gone out of his manner.
“Mais oui. It may be that I know it already. But it will be a point in your favour if it comes from you spontaneously.”
“You talk like the American police. ‘Come clean’—that is what they say—‘come clean.’ ”
“Ah! so you have had experience of the New York police?”
“No, no, never. They could not prove a thing against me—but it was not for want of trying.”
Poirot said quietly: “That was in the Armstrong case, was it not? You were the chauffeur?”
His eyes met those of the Italian. The bluster went out of the big man. He was like a pricked balloon.
“Since you know—why ask me?”
“Why did you lie this morning?”
“Business reasons. Besides, I do not trust the Jugo-Slav police. They hate the Italians. They would not have given me justice.”
“Perhaps it is exactly justice that they would have given you!”
“No, no, I had nothing to do with this business last night. I never left my carriage. The long-faced Englishman, he can tell you so. It was not I who killed this pig—this Ratchett. You cannot prove anything against me.”
Poirot was writing something on a sheet of paper. He looked up and said quietly: “Very good. You can go.”
Foscarelli lingered uneasily. “You realise that it was not I? That I could have had nothing to do with it!”
“I said that you could go.”
“It is a conspiracy. You are going to frame me? All for a pig of a man who should have gone to the chair! It was an infamy that he did not. If it had been me—if I had been arrested—”
“But it was not you. You had nothing to do with the kidnapping of the child.”
“What is that you are saying? Why, that little one—she was the delight of the house. Tonio, she called me. And she would sit in the car and pretend to hold the wheel. All the household worshipped her! Even the police came to understand that. Ah, the beautiful little one!”
His voice had softened. The tears came into his eyes. Then he wheeled round abruptly on his heel and strode out of the dining-car.
“Pietro,” called Poirot.
The dining-car attendant came at a run.
“The No. 10—the Swedish lady.”
“Bien, Monsieur.”
“Another?” cried M. Bouc. “Ah, no—it is not possible. I tell you it is not possible.”
“Mon cher—we have to know. Even if in the end everybody on the train proves to have had a motive for killing Ratchett, we have to know. Once we know, we can settle once for all where the guilt lies.”
“My head is spinning,” groaned M. Bouc.
Greta Ohlsson was ushered in sympathetically by the attendant. She was weeping bitterly.
She collapsed on the seat facing Poirot and wept steadily into a large handkerchief.
“Now do not distress yourself, Mademoiselle. Do not distress yourself,” Poirot patted her on the shoulder. “Just a few little words of truth, that is all. You were the nurse who was in charge of little Daisy Armstrong?”
“It is true—it is true,” wept the wretched woman. “Ah, she was an angel—a little sweet trustful angel. She knew nothing but kindness and love—and she was taken away by that wicked man—cruelly treated—and her poor mother—and the other little one who never lived at all. You cannot understand—you cannot know—if you had been there as I was—if you had seen the whole terrible tragedy! I ought to have told you the truth about myself this morning. But I was afraid—afraid. I did so rejoice that that evil man was dead—that he could not any more kill or torture little children. Ah! I cannot speak—I have no words. ...”
She wept with more vehemence than ever.
Poirot continued to pat her gently on the shoulder. “There—there—I comprehend—I comprehend everything—everything, I tell you. I will ask you no more questions. It is enough that you have admitted what I know to be the truth. I understand, I tell you.”
By now inarticulate with sobs, Greta Ohlsson rose and groped her way towards the door. As she reached it she collided with a man coming in.
It was the valet—Masterman.
He came straight up to Poirot and spoke in his usual quiet, unemotional voice’.
“I hope I’m not intruding, sir. I thought it best to come along at once, sir, and tell you the truth. I was Colonel Armstrong’s batman in the War, sir, and afterwards I was his valet in New York. I’m afraid I concealed that fact this morning. It was very wrong of me, sir, and I thought I’d better come and make a clean breast of it. But I hope, sir, that you’re not suspecting Tonio in any way. Old Tonio, sir, wouldn’t hurt a fly. And I can swear positively that he never left the carriage all last night. So, you see, sir, he couldn’t have done it. Tonio may be a foreigner, sir, but he’s a very gentle creature. Not like those nasty murdering Italians one reads about.”
He stopped.
Poirot looked steadily at him. “Is that all you have to say?”
“That is all, sir.”
He paused; then, as Poirot did not speak, he made an apologetic little bow and after a momentary hesitation left the dining-car in the same quiet unobtrusive fashion as he had come.
“This,” said Dr. Constantine, “is more wildly improbable than any roman policier I have ever read.”
“I agree,” said M. Bouc. “Of the twelve passengers in that coach, nine have been proved to have had a connection with the Armstrong case. What next, I ask you? Or should I say, who next?”
“I can almost give you the answer to your question,” said Poirot. “Here comes our American sleuth, Mr. Hardman.”
“Is he, too, coming to confess?”
Before Poirot could reply the American had reached their table. He cocked an alert eye at them and sitting down he drawled out: “Just exactly what’s up on this train? It seems bughouse to me.”
Poirot twinkled at him.
“Are you quite sure, Mr. Hardman, that you yourself were not the gardener at the Armstrong home?”
“They didn’t have a garden,” replied Mr. Hardman literally.
“Or the butler?”
“Haven’t got the fancy manners for a place like that. No, I never had any connection with the Armstrong house—but I’m beginning to believe I’m about the only one on this train who hadn’t! Can you beat it? That’s what I say—can you beat it?”
“It is certainly a little surprising,” said Poirot mildly.
“C’est rigolo,” burst from M. Bouc.
“Have you any ideas of your own about the crime, Mr. Hardman?” inquired Poirot.
“No, sir. It’s got me beat. I don’t know how to figure it out. They can’t all be in it—but which one is the guilty party is beyond me. How did you get wise to all this? That’s what I want to know.”
“I just guessed.”
“Then, believe me, you’re a pretty slick guesser. Yes, I’ll tell the world you’re a slick guesser.”
Mr. Hardman leaned back and looked at Poirot admiringly.
“You’ll excuse me,” he said, “but no one would believe it to look at you. I take off my hat to you. I do indeed.”
“You are too kind, M. Hardman.”
“Not at all. I’ve got to hand it to you.”
“All the same,” said Poirot, “the problem is not yet quite solved. Can we say with authority that we know who killed M. Ratchett?”
“Count me out,” said Mr. Hardman. “I’m not saying anything at all. I’m just full of natural admiration. What about the other two you haven’t had a guess at yet? The old American dame, and the lady’s-maid? I suppose we can take it that they’re the only innocent parties on the train?”
“Unless,” said Poirot, smiling, “we can fit them into our little collection as—shall we say—housekeeper and cook in the Armstrong household?”
“Well, nothing in the world would surprise me now,” said Mr. Hardman with quiet resignation. “Bughouse—that’s what this business is—bughouse!”
“Ah! mon cher, that would be indeed stretching coincidence a little too far,” said M. Bouc. “They cannot all be in it.”
Poirot looked at him. “You do not understand,” he said. “You do not understand at all. Tell me, do you know who killed Ratchett?”
“Do you?” countered M. Bouc.
Poirot nodded. “Oh, yes,” he said. “I have known for some time. It is so clear that I wonder you have not seen it also.” He looked at Hardman and asked: “And you?”
The detective shook his head. He stared at Poirot curiously. “I don’t know,” he said. “I don’t know at all. Which of them was it?”
Poirot was silent a minute. Then he said:
“If you will be so good, M. Hardman, assemble everyone here. There are two possible solutions of this case. I want to lay them both before you all.”
第八章　更加出乎意料的发现
第八章　更加出乎意料的发现             
    “现在，再也没有东西能使我惊讶了，”鲍克先生说，“没有了！即使车上的每个人，都被证实，曾在阿姆斯特朗家里住过，我也不会感到惊讶了。”
    “这话倒很深刻。”波洛说，“你想看看你认为最可怀疑的人，那个意大利人，并听听他和怎样为自己辩护吗？”
    “你还要来一个精彩的推测吗？”
    “很对。”
    “这真是个非常离奇的案子。”康斯坦丁说。
    “不，倒是十分自然的。”
    猛然，鲍克先生失望地挥动起双臂说：
    “如果这是你所说的自然的话，朋友──”
    他的话突然卡住了。
    这时，波洛才让餐车侍者叫安东尼奥•福斯卡拉里。
    高大的意大利人走了进来，眼神里流露出小心．机警的样子。他的眼睛紧张地瞟来瞟去，好象一只掉进陷阱的野兽。
    “你们要我说什么？”他说。“我没什么可说的，──没有，听到了吗？你们这是白费劲──”他用力拍着桌子。
    “有的，你还有些东西要告诉我们，”波洛有力地说：“还有真情！”
    “真情？”他不安地瞟了波洛一眼，所有自信和泰然的神情，一下子都消失了。
    “当然，也许我已经知道了。然而，这要看你是否自觉自愿地说出来。”
    “听你的口气，就象个美国警察。‘从实招来’，他们就是这样说的──‘从实招来’。”
    “啊！那么，你肯定和纽约的警察有过交往罗？”
    “没有，没有，决没有。他们在我身上找不到半点过错──可这并不需要审讯。”
    波洛平心静气地说：
    “那是在阿姆斯特朗案子里，不是吗？你当时是个开车的。”
    他的目光正好与意大利人的相遇。高大的意大利人息怒了，就象一只戳破了的气球。
    “既然你知道了──为什么还要问我？”
    “今天上午，你为什么要撒谎？”
    “买卖上的原因。此外，我不相信南斯拉夫警察。他们恨意大利人。他们对我是公正的。”
    “也许他们已经给了你最公正的判决！”
    “不会的，不会的，我跟昨晚的事一点关系也没有。我一直呆在包房里。那个长脸英国人能作证。不是我杀死那只猪猡──雷切特的。你们不能证明我有罪。”
    波洛在一张纸上写什么。他抬起头，仍旧心平气和地说：
    “很好，你可以走了。”
    福斯卡拉里心神不宁地徘徊不走。
    “不是我──我跟那事一点关系也没有，你知道吗？”
    “我主你可以走了。”
    “这是阴谋。你想陷害我吗？一切的一切只是为了那只猪猡，那个早该处死的人！以前，他没有被处死，这简直是件丑闻。要是我的话──要是我被捕的话──”
    “然而，并不是你。你跟拐骗小孩没有关系。”
    “你刚才说什么？天哪，那小宝贝──她是整个院子的天使。她叫我安东尼奥。她会坐进我的车，装模作样地握住方向盘。整个院子的人都痛爱她，宠她！就连警察，后来也理解了。啊，美丽的小天使！”
    他的声音轻了下来。眼眶里满是泪水。然后，他猛地转过身支，大步走出餐车。
    “彼得罗。”波洛喊道。
    餐车侍者跑了进来。
    “十号铺──瑞典女人。”
    “是，先生。”
    “还有一个？”鲍克叫了起来，“啊，不──不可能的。我告诉你，这是不可能的。”
    “我亲爱的，我们必须了解，即使最终，车上的每个人都被证实有谋杀雷个案情，我们就永远解决了谁有罪为个问题。”
    “我的脑袋乱极了。”鲍克先生呻吟起来。
    格莱达•奥尔逊太太被侍者带了进来。她哭得很伤心，实在令人同情。
    她瘫倒在波洛对面的椅子里，捂着一块大手帕，不停地哭泣。
    “别再伤心了，太太。别太伤心了。”波洛拍拍她的肩膀。“只要讲几句真话，就行了。你是黛西．阿姆斯特朗的护士，是吗？”
    “是的──是的。”可怜的女人哭个不停。“啊，她是个天使──一个真正可爱的小天使。她的心里只有善和爱──可是，她却被那个恶棍拐走了──受尽了折磨──她那可怜的妈妈──还有另一个小孩，从未出世的小孩。你们是可不能理解的──你们不会知道──要是你们也象我一样，在那儿的话──要是你们亲眼目睹那个可怕的悲剧──今天上午，我就把真情告诉你们的。但是我害怕──我怕，我实在是高兴，因为那个恶棍已经死了──他再也不能杀害或虐待其它的孩子了。啊！我说不下去了──我没有话可说的了……”
    她哭得比先前更加厉害起来。
    波洛继续轻轻地拍着她的肩膀。
    “好了──好了──我听懂了──我听懂了一切，告诉你，我不再问你了。你已经承认了我认为是真实的东西，这就够了。我理解了──告诉你。”
    格莱达•奥尔逊太太已经泣不成声了，她站起身，盲目地向门口走去。她刚到门口，就和进来的一个男人撞了个满怀。
    马斯特曼──那个男佣人。
    他径直朝波洛走去，说话时，声音还是跟往常一样平心静气。
    “我希望，我没有打扰你，先生。我想，我还是马上到这儿来，先生，来告诉你们真情。我是阿姆斯特朗上校战时的勤务兵，后来，就成了他在纽约时的佣人。因为害怕，今天上午我隐瞒了这段真情，这是很错误的，先生。因此，我想，我还是赶快赤这儿，把我所知道的，和盘托出。但是，先生，请你们无论如何不要怀疑安东尼奥。安东尼奥，先生，连苍蝇也不会伤害的。我可以发誓，昨天晚上，他整整一夜，确实没有离开过他的包房。所以，你们看，他是不可能作案的。安东尼奥虽是个外国人，先生，可他是很温和善良的──不象人们在书报中所读到的，那种卑鄙的，杀人不眨眼的意大利人．”
    他停了下来。
    波洛沉着地看着他，说：
    “这就是你要说的一切？”
    “是的，先生。”
    他停了停，然后，因为波洛不响，他就微微弯了弯腰，表示歉意。他犹豫了一下后，又象来时那样，平静而又礼貌地离开了餐车。
    “这可是，”康斯坦丁大夫说，“比我所看过的任何侦探小说还要奇妙。”
    “我有同感，”鲍克先生说。“十二个旅客中，已有九个人被证实与阿姆斯特朗案有关，请问，下一步怎么办？或者说，谁是下一个呢？”
    “我差不多能够回答你的问题。”波洛说，“你看，我们的美国侦探，哈特曼先生来了。”
    “他也是来表白的吗？”
    波洛还没来得及回答，这个美国人已经来到桌边。
    他警惕地看看他们，然后坐下来，慢吞吞地说：
    “说实在的，车上究竟发生了什么事？简直象个疯人院。”
    波洛向他眨了眨眼：
    你能肯定，哈特曼先生，你本人不是阿姆斯特朗家里的园丁吗？“他们家没有花园。”哈特曼先生一字一字地答道。
    “那么是管家？”
    “我脑子里，连那个院子一点关系也没有──但是，我逐渐相信，我是这车上唯一跟他家没有牵连的人。你感到吃惊吗──我说？吃惊吗？”
    “当然，有一点儿令人吃惊。”波洛轻声地说。
    “这是开玩笑。”鲍克先生突然喊了起来。
    “对这个案子，你有没有自己的想法？”波洛问道。
    “没有，先生。它使我吃惊。我不知道怎样来分析．判断。他们不可能全都卷了进去。
至于谁是有罪的呢，这一问题，已经超出了我力所能及的范围。你是怎样弄清楚这一切的呢？这也就是我想知道的东西。”
    “只是凭推测。”
    “那么，相信我你是个十分机智聪明的推测家。对，我将告诉全世界，你是个机智聪明的推测家。”
    哈伯曼先生向后靠在椅子里，赞赏地看着波洛。
    “请原谅，”他说，“可乍一看到你，没有人会相信你的。我向你致敬。真的，向你致敬。”
    “你太好了，哈特曼先生。”
    “没什么，我非常钦佩你。”
    彼此，彼此。“波洛说，”问题还没完全解决。我们能否向当局报告，我们知道是谁杀了雷切特先生？
    “可我算不上，”哈特曼先生说，“我根本没什么，只是很自然地表示对你的赞赏。另外两个人怎么样，你还没有推测过？那个美国老太太以及她的女佣人？我想，我们可以相信，她俩是车上仅有的无辜之人？”
    “除非，”波洛笑着说，“我们可以把她们当作──可以这样说吗？──阿姆斯特朗家里的女管家和厨娘。”
    “现在，再也没的什么会使我吃惊了。”哈特曼先生平静而又无可奈何地说。“疯人院──这种事就是这样──疯人院！”
    “啊，我亲爱的，这些巧合真是太离奇了，”鲍克先生说，“他们不可能都卷入了谋杀。”
    波洛看着他。
    “你不理解，”他说，“根本就不理解。告诉我，”凶说，“你知道是谁杀了雷切特？”
    “你呢？”鲍克先生反问道。
    波洛点点头。
    “噢，知道。”他说，“我知道已有一些时间了。事情已经如此一清二楚，我真奇怪你们也会看不出来。”他看看哈特曼，问道：“那么你呢？”
    美国侦探摇摇头，好奇地盯着波洛。
    “我不知道。”他说，“我一点也不知道。他们当中的谁呢？”
    波洛沉默了一会儿，然后说：
    “如果你愿意帮忙的话，哈特曼先生。把所有的人都集合到这儿来。本案的结论有两种可能。我将把两种可能的结论，都告诉大家。”
9 POIROT PROPOUNDS TWO SOLUTIONS
9 POIROT PROPOUNDS TWO SOLUTIONS
The passengers came crowding into the restaurant car and took their seats round the tables. They all bore more or less the same expression, one of expectancy mingled with apprehension. The Swedish lady was still weeping, and Mrs. Hubbard was comforting her.
“Now you must just take a hold on yourself, my dear. Everything’s going to be perfectly all right. You mustn’t lose your grip on yourself. If one of us is a nasty murderer, we know quite well it isn’t you. Why, anyone would be crazy even to think of such a thing. You sit here, and I’ll stay right by you—and don’t you worry any.” Her voice died away as Poirot stood up.
The Wagon Lit conductor was hovering in the doorway. “You permit that I stay, Monsieur?”
“Certainly, Michel.”
Poirot cleared his throat.
“Messieurs et mesdames, I will speak in English since I think all of you know a little of that language. We are here to investigate the death of Samuel Edward Ratchett—alias Cassetti. There are two possible solutions of the crime. I shall put them both before you, and I shall ask M. Bouc, and Dr. Constantine here to judge which solution is the right one.
“Now you all know the facts of the case. Mr. Ratchett was found stabbed this morning. He was last known to be alive at 12.37 last night when he spoke to the Wagon Lit conductor through the door. A watch in his pyjama pocket was found to be badly dented, and it had stopped at a quarter past one. Dr. Constantine, who examined the body when found, puts the time of death as having been between midnight and two in the morning. At half an hour after midnight, as you all know, the train ran into a snowdrift. After that time it was impossible for anyone to leave the train.
“The evidence of Mr. Hardman, who is a member of a New York detective agency—” (Several heads turned, to look at Mr. Hardman.)—“shows that no one could have passed his compartment (No. 16 at the extreme end) without being seen by him. We are therefore forced to the conclusion that the murderer is to be found among the occupants of one particular coach—the Stamboul-Calais coach.
“That, I will say, was our theory.”
“Comment?” ejaculated M. Bouc, startled.
“But I will put before you an alternative theory. It is very simple. Mr. Ratchett had a certain enemy whom he feared. He gave Mr. Hardman a description of this enemy and told him that the attempt, if made at all, would most probably be made on the second night out from Stamboul.
“Now I put it to you, ladies and gentlemen, that Mr. Ratchett knew a good deal more than he told. The enemy, as Mr. Ratchett expected, joined the train at Belgrade or else at Vincovci by the door left open by Colonel Arbuthnot and Mr. MacQueen, who had just descended to the platform. He was provided with a suit of Wagon Lit uniform, which he wore over his ordinary clothes, and a pass-key which enabled him to gain access to Mr. Ratchett’s compartment in spite of the door’s being locked. Mr. Ratchett was under the influence of a sleeping draught. This man stabbed him with great ferocity and left the compartment through the communicating door leading to Mrs. Hubbard’s compartment—”
“That’s so,” said Mrs. Hubbard, nodding her head.
“He thrust the dagger he had used into Mrs. Hubbard’s sponge-bag in passing. Without knowing it, he lost a button of his uniform. Then he slipped out of the compartment and along the corridor. He hastily thrust the uniform into a suitcase in an empty compartment, and a few minutes later, dressed in ordinary clothes, he left the train just before it started off, using the same means for egress—the door near the dining-car.”
Everybody gasped.
“What about that watch?” demanded Mr. Hardman.
“There you have the explanation of the whole thing. Mr. Ratchett had omitted to put his watch back an hour as he should have done at Tzaribrod. His watch still registered Eastern European time, which is one hour ahead of Central European time. It was a quarter past twelve when Mr. Ratchett was stabbed—not a quarter past one.”
“But it is absurd, that explanation!” cried M. Bouc. “What of the voice that spoke from the compartment at twenty-three minutes to one? It was either the voice of Ratchett—or else that of his murderer.”
“Not necessarily. It might have been—well—a third person. One who had gone in to speak to Ratchett and found him dead. He rang the bell to summon the conductor; then, as you express it, the wind rose in him—he was afraid of being accused of the crime, and he spoke pretending to be Ratchett.”
“C’est possible,” admitted M. Bouc grudgingly.
Poirot looked at Mrs. Hubbard. “Yes, Madame, you were going to say—”
“Well, I don’t quite know what I was going to say. Do you think I forgot to put my watch back too?”
“No, Madame. I think you heard the man pass through—but unconsciously. Later you had a nightmare of a man being in your compartment and woke up with a start and rang for the conductor.”
“Well, I suppose that’s possible,” admitted Mrs. Hubbard.
Princess Dragomiroff was looking at Poirot with a very direct glance. “How do you explain the evidence of my maid, Monsieur?”
“Very simply, Madame. Your maid recognised the handkerchief I showed her as yours. She somewhat clumsily tried to shield you. She did encounter the man, but earlier—while the train was at Vincovci station. She pretended to have seen him at a later hour, with a confused idea of giving you a water-tight alibi.”
The Princess bowed her head. “You have thought of everything, Monsieur. I—I admire you.”
There was a silence.
Then everyone jumped as Dr. Constantine suddenly hit the table a blow with his fist.
“But no,” he said. “No, no, and again no! That is an explanation that will not hold water. It is deficient in a dozen minor points. The crime was not committed so—M. Poirot must know that perfectly well.”
Poirot turned a curious glance on him. “I see,” he said, “that I shall have to give you my second solution. But do not abandon this one too abruptly. You may agree with it later.”
He turned back again to face the others.
“There is another possible solution of the crime. This is how I arrived at it.
“When I had heard all the evidence, I leaned back and shut my eyes, and began to think. Certain points presented themselves to me as worthy of attention. I enumerated these points to my two colleagues. Some I have already elucidated—such as a grease spot on a passport, and so on. I will run over the points that remain. The first and most important is a remark made to me by M. Bouc in the restaurant car at lunch on the first day after leaving Stamboul—to the effect that the company assembled was interesting because it was so varied—representing as it did all classes and nationalities.
“I agreed with him, but when this particular point came into my mind, I tried to imagine whether such an assembly was ever likely to be collected under any other conditions. And the answer I made to myself was—only in America. In America there might be a household composed of just such varied nationalities—an Italian chauffeur, an English governess, a Swedish nurse, a German lady’s-maid, and so on. That led me to my scheme of ‘guessing’—that is, casting each person for a certain part in the Armstrong drama much as a producer casts a play. Well, that gave me an extremely interesting and satisfactory result.
“I had also examined in my own mind each separate person’s evidence, with some curious results. Take first the evidence of Mr. MacQueen. My first interview with him was entirely satisfactory. But in my second he made rather a curious remark. I had described to him the finding of a note mentioning the Armstrong case. He said, ‘But surely—’ and then paused and went on, ‘I mean—that was rather careless of the old man.’
“Now I could feel that that was not what he had started out to say. Supposing what he had meant to say was ‘But surely that was burnt!’ In which case, MacQueen knew of the note and of its destruction—in other words, he was either the murderer or an accomplice of the murderer. Very good.
“Then the valet. He said his master was in the habit of taking a sleeping draught when travelling by train. That might be true, but would Ratchett have taken one last night? The automatic under his pillow gave the lie to that statement. Ratchett intended to be on the alert last night. Whatever narcotic was administered to him must have been given without his knowledge. By whom? Obviously by MacQueen or the valet.
“Now we come to the evidence of Mr. Hardman. I believed all that he told me about his own identity, but when it came to the actual methods he had employed to guard Mr. Ratchett, his story was neither more nor less than absurd. The only way to have protected Ratchett effectively was to pass the night actually in his compartment or in some spot where he could watch the door. The one thing that his evidence did show plainly was that no one in any other part of the train could possibly have murdered Ratchett. It drew a clear circle round the Stamboul-Calais carriage. That seemed to me a rather curious and inexplicable fact, and I put it aside to think over.
“You probably all know by now of the few words I overheard between Miss Debenham and Colonel Arbuthnot. The interesting thing to my mind was the fact that Colonel Arbuthnot called her Mary and was clearly on terms of intimacy with her. But the Colonel was supposed to have met her only a few days previously. And I know Englishmen of the Colonel’s type—even if he had fallen in love with the young lady at first sight, he would have advanced slowly and with decorum, not rushing things. Therefore I concluded that Colonel Arbuthnot and Miss Debenham were in reality well acquainted and were for some reason pretending to be strangers. Another small point was Miss Debenham’s easy familiarity with the term ‘long distance’ for a telephone call. Yet Miss Debenham had told me that she had never been in the States.
“To pass to another witness. Mrs. Hubbard had told us that lying in bed she had been unable to see whether the communicating door was bolted or not, and so had asked Miss Ohlsson to see for her. Now—though her statement would have been perfectly true if she had been occupying compartment No. 2, 4, 12 or any even number, in which the bolt is directly under the handle of the door—in the uneven numbers such as compartment No. 3 the bolt is well above the handle and could not therefore be masked by the sponge-bag in the least. I was forced to the conclusion that Mrs. Hubbard was inventing an incident that had never occurred.
“And here let me say just a word or two about times. To my mind the really interesting point about the dented watch, is the place where it was found—in Ratchett’s pyjama pocket, a singularly uncomfortable and unlikely place to keep one’s watch, especially as there is a watch ‘hook’ provided just by the head of the bed. I felt sure, therefore, that the watch had been deliberately placed in the pocket—faked. The crime, then, was not committed at a quarter past one.
“Was it then committed earlier? To be exact, at twenty-three minutes to one? My friend M. Bouc advanced as an argument in favour of it the loud cry which awoke me from sleep. But if Ratchett had been heavily drugged, he could not have cried out. If he had been capable of crying out, he would have been capable of making some kind of struggle to defend himself, and there were no signs of any such struggle.
“I remembered that MacQueen had called attention, not once but twice (and the second time in a very blatant manner), to the fact that Ratchett could speak no French. I came to the conclusion that the whole business at twenty-three minutes to one was a comedy played for my benefit! Anyone might see through the watch business—it is a common enough device in detective stories. They assumed that I should see through it and that, pluming myself on my own cleverness, I would go on to assume that since Ratchett spoke no French, the voice I heard at twenty-three minutes to one could not have been his, and that Ratchett must have been already dead. But I am convinced that at twenty-three minutes to one Ratchett was still lying in his drugged sleep.
“But the device has succeeded! I have opened my door and looked out. I have actually heard the French phrase used. If I am so unbelievably dense as not to realise the significance of that phrase, it must be brought to my attention. If necessary, MacQueen can come right out in the open. He can say, ‘Excuse me, M. Poirot, that can’t have been Mr. Ratchett speaking. He couldn’t speak French.’
“Now, what was the real time of the crime? And who killed him?
“In my opinion—and this is only an opinion—Ratchett was killed at some time very close upon two o’clock, the latest hour the doctor gives us as possible.
“As to who killed him—”
He paused, looking at his audience. He could not complain of any lack of attention. Every eye was fixed upon him. In the stillness you could have heard a pin drop.
He went on slowly:
“I was particularly struck by the extraordinary difficulty of proving a case against any one person on the train, and by the rather curious coincidence that in each case the testimony giving an alibi came from what I might describe as an ‘unlikely’ person. Thus, Mr. MacQueen and Colonel Arbuthnot provided alibis for each other—two persons between whom it seemed most unlikely there should have been any prior acquaintanceship. The same thing happened with the English valet and the Italian, and with the Swedish lady and the English girl. I said to myself: This is extraordinary—they cannot all be in it!
“And then, Messieurs, I saw light. They were all in it. For so many people connected with the Armstrong case to be travelling by the same train through coincidence was not only unlikely: it was impossible. It must be not chance, but design. I remembered a remark of Colonel Arbuthnot’s about trial by jury. A jury is composed of twelve people—there were twelve passengers—Ratchett was stabbed twelve times. And the thing that had worried me all along—the extraordinary crowd travelling in the Stamboul-Calais coach at a slack time of year—this was explained.
“Ratchett had escaped justice in America. There was no question as to his guilt. I visualised a self-appointed jury of twelve people who had condemned him to death and who by the exigencies of the case had themselves been forced to be his executioners. And immediately, on that assumption, the whole case fell into beautiful shining order.
“I saw it as a perfect mosaic, each person playing his or her allotted part. It was so arranged that, if suspicion should fall on any one person, the evidence of one or more of the others would clear the accused person and confuse the issue. Hardman’s evidence was necessary in case some outsider should be suspected of the crime and be unable to prove an alibi. The passengers in the Stamboul carriage were in no danger. Every minute detail of their evidence was worked out beforehand. The whole thing was a very cleverly planned jigsaw puzzle, so arranged that every fresh piece of knowledge that came to light made the solution of the whole more difficult. As my friend M. Bouc remarked, the case seemed fantastically impossible! That was exactly the impression intended to be conveyed.
“Did this solution explain everything? Yes, it did. The nature of the wounds—each inflicted by a different person. The artificial threatening letters—artificial since they were unreal, written only to be produced as evidence. (Doubtless there were real letters, warning Ratchett of his fate, which MacQueen destroyed, substituting for them these others.) Then Hardman’s story of being called in by Ratchett—a lie, of course, from beginning to end. The description of the mythical ‘small dark man with a womanish voice’—a convenient description since it had the merit of not incriminating any of the actual Wagon Lit conductors and would apply equally well to a man or a woman.
“The idea of stabbing is at first sight a curious one, but on reflection nothing else would fit the circumstances so well. A dagger was a weapon that could be used by everyone—strong or weak—and it made no noise. I fancy, though I may be wrong, that each person in turn entered Ratchett’s darkened compartment through that of Mrs. Hubbard—and struck! They themselves would never know which blow actually killed him.
“The final letter which Ratchett had probably found on his pillow was carefully burnt. With no clue pointing to the Armstrong case there would be absolutely no reason for suspecting any of the passengers on the train. It would be put down as an outside job, and the ‘small dark man with the womanish voice’ would actually have been seen by one or more of the passengers leaving the train, at Brod!
“I do not know exactly what happened when the conspirators discovered that this part of their plan was impossible owing to the accident to the train. There was, I imagine, a hasty consultation, and then they decided to go through with it. It was true that now one and all of the passengers were bound to come under suspicion, but that possibility had already been foreseen and provided for. The only additional thing to be done was to confuse the issue even further. Two so-called ‘clues’ were dropped in the dead man’s compartment—one incriminating Colonel Arbuthnot (who had the strongest alibi and whose connection with the Armstrong family was probably the hardest to prove); and the second clue, the handkerchief, incriminating Princess Dragomiroff who, by virtue of her social position, her particularly frail physique and the alibi given her by her maid and the conductor, was practically in an unassailable position.
“Further to confuse the issue, a red herring was drawn across the trail—the mythical woman in the red kimono. Again I am to bear witness to this woman’s existence. There is a heavy bang at my door. I get up and look out—and see the scarlet kimono disappearing in the distance. A judicious selection of people—the conductor, Miss Debenham and MacQueen—will also have seen her. It was, I think, someone with a sense of humour who thoughtfully placed the scarlet kimono on the top of my suitcase whilst I was interviewing people in the dining-car. Where the garment came from in the first place, I do not know. I suspect it is the property of Countess Andrenyi, since her luggage contained only a chiffon negligee so elaborate as to be rather a tea-gown than a dressing-gown.
“When MacQueen first learned that the letter which had been so carefully burnt had in part escaped destruction, and that the word Armstrong was exactly the word remaining, he must at once have communicated his news, to the others. It was at this minute that the position of Countess Andrenyi became acute, and her husband immediately took steps to alter the passport. It was their second piece of bad luck!
“They one and all agreed to deny utterly any connection with the Armstrong family. They knew I had no immediate means of finding out the truth, and they did not believe that I should go into the matter unless my suspicions were aroused against one particular person.
“Now there was one further point to consider. Allowing that my theory of the crime was the correct one, and I believed that it must be the correct one, then obviously the Wagon Lit conductor himself must be privy to the plot. But if so, that gave us thirteen persons, not twelve. Instead of the usual formula ‘Of so many people one is guilty,’ I was faced with the problem that of thirteen persons one and one only was innocent. Which was that person?
“I came to a very odd conclusion. I came to the conclusion that the person who had taken no part in the crime was the person who would be considered the most likely to do so. I refer to Countess Andrenyi. I was impressed by the earnestness of her husband when he swore to me solemnly on his honour that his wife never left her compartment that night. I decided that Count Andrenyi took, so to speak, his wife’s place.
“If so, then Pierre Michel was definitely one of the twelve. But how could one explain his complicity? He was a decent man who had been many years in the employ of the company—not the kind of man who could be bribed to assist in a crime. Then Pierre Michel must be involved in the Armstrong case. But that seemed very improbable. Then I remembered that the dead nursery-maid had been French. Supposing that that unfortunate girl had been Pierre Michel’s daughter. That would explain everything—it would also explain the place chosen for the staging of the crime. Were there any others whose part in the drama was not clear? Colonel Arbuthnot I put down as a friend of the Armstrongs. They had probably been through the War together. The maid, Hildegarde Schmidt—I could guess her place in the Armstrong household. I am, perhaps, over greedy, but I sense a good cook instinctively. I laid a trap for her—she fell into it. I said I knew she was a good cook. She answered: ‘Yes, indeed, all my ladies have said so.’ But if you are employed as a lady’s-maid your employers seldom have a chance of learning whether or not you are a good cook.
“Then there was Hardman. He seemed quite definitely not to belong to the Armstrong household. I could only imagine that he had been in love with the French girl. I spoke to him of the charm of foreign women—and again I obtained the reaction I was looking for. Sudden tears came into his eyes, which he pretended were dazzled by the snow.
“There remains Mrs. Hubbard. Now Mrs. Hubbard, let me say, played the most important part in the drama. By occupying the compartment communicating with that of Ratchett she was more open to suspicion than anyone else. In the nature of things she could not have an alibi to fall back upon. To play the part she played—the perfectly natural, slightly ridiculous American fond mother—an artist was needed. But there was an artist connected with the Armstrong family: Mrs. Armstrong’s mother—Linda Arden, the actress . ...”
He stopped.
Then in a soft rich dreamy voice, quite unlike the one she had used throughout the journey, Mrs. Hubbard said:
“I always fancied myself in comedy parts.”
She went on, still dreamily:
“That slip about the sponge-bag was silly. It shows that you should always rehearse property. We tried it on the way out—I was in an even-number compartment then, I suppose. I never thought of the bolts being in different places.”
She shifted her position a little and looked straight at Poirot.
“You know all about it, M. Poirot. You’re a very wonderful man. But even you can’t quite imagine what it was like—that awful day in New York. I was just crazy with grief; so were the servants. And Colonel Arbuthnot was there too. He was John Armstrong’s best friend.”
“He saved my life in the War,” said Arbuthnot.
“We decided then and there (perhaps we were mad—I don’t know) that the sentence of death that Cassetti had escaped had got to be carried out. There were twelve of us—or rather eleven; Susanne’s father was over in France, of course. First we thought we’d draw lots as to who should do it, but in the end we decided on this way. It was the chauffeur, Antonio, who suggested it. Mary worked out all the details later with Hector MacQueen. He’d always adored Sonia—my daughter—and it was he who explained to us exactly how Cassetti’s money had managed to get him off.
“It took a long time to perfect our plan. We had first to track Ratchett down. Hardman managed that in the end. Then we had to try and get Masterman and Hector into his employment—or at any rate one of them. Well, we managed that. Then we had a consultation with Susanne’s father. Colonel Arbuthnot was very keen on having twelve of us. He seemed to think it made it more in order. He didn’t like the stabbing idea much, but he agreed that it did solve most of our difficulties. Well, Susanne’s father was willing. Susanne had been his only child. We knew from Hector that Ratchett would be coming back from the East sooner or later by the Orient Express. With Pierre Michel actually working on that train, the chance was too good to be missed. Besides, it would be a good way of not incriminating any outsiders.
“My daughter’s husband had to know, of course, and he insisted on coming on the train with her. Hector wangled it so that Ratchett selected the right day for travelling, when Michel would be on duty. We meant to engage every carriage in the Stamboul-Calais coach, but unfortunately there was one carriage we couldn’t get. It had been reserved long beforehand for a director of the company. ‘Mr. Harris,’ of course, was a myth. But it would have been awkward to have any stranger in Hector’s compartment. And then, at the last minute, you came. ...”
She stopped.
“Well,” she said, “you know everything now, M. Poirot. What are you going to do about it? If it must all come out, can’t you lay the blame upon me and me only? I would have stabbed that man twelve times willingly. It wasn’t only that he was responsible for my daughter’s death and her child’s and that of the other child who might have been alive and happy now. It was more than that: there had been other children kidnapped before Daisy, and there might be others in the future. Society had condemned him—we were only carrying out the sentence. But it’s unnecessary to bring all these others into it. All these good faithful souls—and poor Michel-and Mary and Colonel Arbuthnot—they love each other. ...”
Her voice was wonderful, echoing through the crowded space—that deep, emotional, heart-stirring voice that had thrilled many a New York audience.
Poirot looked at his friend.
“You are a director of the company, M. Bouc,” he said. “What do you say?”
M. Bouc cleared his throat.
“In my opinion, M. Poirot,” he said, “the first theory you put forward was the correct one—decidedly so. I suggest that that is the solution we offer to the Jugo-Slavian police when they arrive. You agree, doctor?”
“Certainly I agree,” said Dr. Constantine. “As regards the medical evidence, I think—er—that I made one or two fantastic suggestions.”
“Then,” said Poirot, “having placed my solution before you, I have the honour to retire from the case. ...”
第九章　两个结论
第九章　两个结论             
    所有的旅客都拥入餐车，围着桌子坐定。他们的脸部表情多少有点相似──一种期待和害怕相混合的心情。那个瑞典女人还在哭哭啼啼，哈伯德太太在一旁安慰她。
    “现在，你必须克制住自己，亲爱的。一切都会好的。你可要克制啊。如果那卑鄙的凶手就在我们中间，大家都清楚，那不会是你。哎，只要想到这种事，谁都会发狂的。你就这么坐着，我就在你身边。别再担忧了。”
    波洛站起来，她就不作声了。
    列车员在门口徘徊。
    “我可以呆在这儿吗，先生？”
    “当然可以，米歇尔。”
    波洛清了清嗓子。
    “先生们，女士们：我用英语讲，因为你们大家都懂一点英语。我们净研究一下塞缪尔•爱德华•雷切特──凯赛梯的化名──之死。对这一谋杀案的结论，现有两种可能。我将把这两种情况都告诉你们，并让鲍克先生和康斯坦丁大夫来裁决，那一个是正确的。”
    “你们大家都已了解本案发现的经过。今天早晨，有人发现雷切特先生被刺身死。昨晚十二点三十七分，有人看到他还活着，那时，他在房门口跟列车员讲过话。在他的睡衣口袋里，发现一块被敲瘪的表，表针指的时间是晚上十二点至凌晨两点。正如大家所知道的，晚上十二点半时，列车撞入雪堆之中，十二点半以后，任何人要离开列车，都是不可能的。”
    “哈特曼先生，是纽约侦探机关的侦探。（有几个人转头向哈特曼先生望去）他的证词表明，没有任何人能以过他的包房（卧车尽头是十六号铺），而又不被他发现的。因此，我们只好作出这样一个结论：凶手可以在一个特定的车厢──伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢里找到。”
    “我要说，这就是我们的推论。”
    “怎么？”鲍克先生大吃一惊，突然喊出了声。
    “然而，我将把另一个推论告诉你们，这是很简单的。雷切特先生有个仇敌。这个人他感到恐惧。他向哈特曼先生讲了这个仇敌的模样，并且告诉他，假如谋杀发生的话，很可能会在列车离开伊斯坦布尔后的第二个晚上。”
    “现在，我告诉你们，女士们，先生们，雷切特先生知道的，比他讲的要多的多。这个仇敌，正如雷切特想的那样，在贝尔格莱德，或许在文科夫戚上了车。他是从阿巴思诺特上校和麦克昆先生开的门上车的。他俩刚从这门下车到月台上去。有人给了这个人一套列车员制服。他把它套在自己的衣服外面；他用一把万能钥匙打开了锁着的门，走进了雷切特的包房。此时，雷切特由于安眠药的作用，已经睡熟了。这个人非常凶狠地戳了雷切特十二刀，然后，穿过通向哈伯德太太包房的门逃了出去──”
    “正是这样。”哈伯德太太点点头说。
    “他在路过哈伯德太太的包房时，把刚用过的匕首顺手塞进她的旅行手提包。但无意中，他掉了一颗制服钮扣。然后，他溜出包房，沿着过道逃走了。此时，他又匆匆把制服塞进一个空着的包房的手提箱里。几分种后，又穿着普通衣服，在列车即将开动之前，仍旧从餐车附近的门──他来时的门──下了车。”
    所有的人都屏住气息。
    “那表，怎么解释呢？”哈特曼问道。
    “我会把整个案件全给你们讲清楚的。雷切特先生应该在察里布罗特就把表拨慢一个钟头，可他忘了。他的表仍旧是东欧时间，比中欧时间要早一个钟头。因此，雷切特先生遇刺的时间是十二点一刻──而不是一点一刻。”
    “可这样的解释是荒唐的。”鲍克先生喊道，“一点差二十三分，他房里传出来的声音怎么解释，那声音要么是雷切特的──否则，就是凶手的。”
    “未必如此。可能──嗯──是第三者的。这个人走进雷切特的包房，想跟他说话，但发现他已经死了。他立即按铃叫列车员，于是，就象你所说的那样，一想苗头不对──他怕被指控谋杀，就学起雷切特的说话声音来。”
    “这倒有可能。”鲍克先生勉强表示同意。
    波洛看了看哈伯德太太。
    “啊，夫人，你是想说──？”
    “是的，可我不太清楚我要说些什么。你认为，我也忘了把表拨慢了吗？”
    “不，夫人。我想，你是听到这个人走过你的房间的──然而，是无意识的。后来，你作了个梦，梦见一个男人在你房里，你惊醒了，就按铃叫列车员。”
    “呃，我想，这是可能的。”哈伯德太太承认了。
    德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人很直率地看了波洛一眼。
    “你怎么解释我那女佣人的证词，先生？”
    “很简单，夫人。你的女佣人认出了我给她看的手帕。她想掩护你，可不那么高明。她确实碰到过一个男人──但要早些──当列车停靠在文科夫戚站时。她故意说她是那以后的某个时间见到他的，稀里糊涂地想为你提供一个作案时你不在场的证据。”
    公爵夫人点了点头。
    “一切你都想到了──先生──我，我佩服你。”
    餐车里一片沉默。
    突然，康斯坦丁大夫捶了桌子一拳，所有人都跳了起来。
    “可是不对，”他说，“不对，不对，还是不对！这样的解释是站不住脚的，在许多次要方面有漏洞。谋杀的经过，肯定不是这样──波洛先生完全清楚这一点。”
    波洛转过头来，诧异地看了他一眼。
    “这我知道，”他说，“我还要给你们第二个结论呢。可是别太快地把这一结论忘了。
也许你们以后还会同意这第一个结论的。”
    他回转身，仍旧面对其他人，说：
    “对这个谋杀案，还有另一个可能的结论。我是这样得出的。”
    “听了所有的证词后，我就背靠座椅，合上双眼，开始思考起来。某些东西看来值得注意。我把它们一一列举给我的两个同事。有些，我已经解释过了──比如，护照上的油迹等等。我将简要地指出剩下的几点。第一点，同时也是最重要的一点──就是鲍克先生的一句话。那是列车离开伊斯坦布尔的第一天，在餐车里吃中饭时说的──得到的印象是，聚集在这儿的一伙人很有趣，因为他们是如此的不同，有着各种不同的阶级和来自不同的国家。”
    “我同意他的看法。然而，一想到这个怪现象，我就设想过，这样一伙人再任何其它情况下，是否有可能聚集拢来。我自己作的回答是──只有在美国。只有在美国，这个家才可能由来自这么多不同国家的人所组成──一个意大利司机，一个英国家庭女教师，一个瑞典护士，还有一个法国女佣人等等。我的‘推测’方案就是由此而产生的──也就是说，在很大程度上，象一个导演选派角色那样，确定各人在阿姆斯特朗这出戏中所扮演的特定的角色。就这样，我取得相当有趣而满意的结论。”
    “同时，我还用一些奇怪的结论来检验各人的证词。比如说，第一个证词，那是麦克昆先生的。跟他的第一次交谈，我感到非常满意。然而，在第二次时，他说了一句相当奇怪的话，我对他说，我们发现了一封信，这封信上提到了阿姆斯特朗案件。他说：‘但是，可能肯定──’然而，他停了停，接着又说：‘我是说──那老头儿是相当粗心的。’”
    “于是，我就感到这不是他原来打算说的话。假设，他原来打算说的是：‘但是，可以肯定，信已经烧毁了！’这样的话，麦克昆肯定知道这封信以及信已经被人烧毁了──换句话说，他不是凶手就是凶手的同伙。妙啊。”
    “第二个，是那位男佣人。他说，他的主人乘火车旅行时，每天晚上睡觉前，都要服一片安眠药。这有可能是真的。然而，雷切特昨晚服药了吗？他枕下的自动手枪可以证明，他的男佣人再撒谎，昨晚，雷切特打算要加倍提防的。可以肯定，对他实施的任何麻醉都是在他本人不知道的情况下进行的。谁干的呢？显然，是麦克昆或者是他的佣人。”
    “现在，我们再来看看哈特曼先生的证词。我完全相信他自己介绍的身份。然而，当说到他用以保护雷切特先生的实际手段时，他的说法恰恰是荒谬的。保护雷切特唯一的有效的办法，是同他一起在他的包房里过夜，或者呆在能够注意到他的房门的某个地方。他的证词却能清楚表明的唯一的一点是：列车上，其它车厢的任何人都没有可能谋杀雷切特。圈子已明显地缩小到伊斯坦布尔──加莱车厢。这一点在我看来，是相当奇怪而费解的。我就把它搁在一边，留待以后在思考。”
    “我的耳朵曾经碰巧刮到德贝汉小姐和阿巴思诺特上校叫她玛丽。显然，这说明，他俩的关系很亲密的。然而，上校却装得仅仅是在几天之前才遇见她－－可我了解上校这种类型的英国人。即使他对她一见钟情，他还是会慢慢地．有礼节地向她求爱－－而不会如此仓促鲁莽。因此，我得出如下结论：阿巴思诺特一校和德贝汉小姐，实际上早就互相熟悉了。只是为了某种原因，才假装陌生的。另外，还有一点，稍微次要些，就是德贝汉小姐很熟悉‘长途电话’这个词。然而，她却告诉我，她从来也没有到过美国。
    “再来谈谈另一个证人。哈伯德太太告诉我们，睡在床上，她是不能看见通向雷切特包房的门是否已经闩上的。因此，她请奥尔逊太太帮她看看。那么，尽管她所说的完全是事实，假如她的包房号码是二、四、十二或是任何双号──插销正好在拉手的上方。因此，根本不可能被旅行手提包遮住。我只好作出如下结论：哈伯德太太凭空捏造了一个从来没有发生过的事件。”
    “这里，我再就时间问题讲几句。依我看，关于那块敲瘪了的表，真正有趣的是它被发现的地方－－雷切特的睡衣口袋里，一个非常不舒服和不适宜放表的地方，况且，就在床头边，还有个‘钩’，专门用来挂表。因此，我确信，那块表是有意放进口袋的，是伪装的假象。谋杀肯定不是发生在一点一刻。”
    “那么，作案时间比一点一刻早吗？说确切点儿，是一点差二十三分吗？我的朋友鲍克先生倾向于这一点。他举出，我正是被那时的大声呼喊所惊醒的这一事实，来和我辩论。然而，假如雷切特麻醉得厉害，他不可能喊出声来。假如他能呼喊，他就有能力搏斗，进行自卫。但是，没有任何这种搏斗的迹象。”
    “我记得，麦克昆曾经提醒人们注意，不止一次，而是两次（第二次是相当明显的），雷切特不会讲法语。我得出一个结论，一点差二十三分时所发生的整个事情是个喜剧。专门为我而演出的喜剧！任何人都有可能识破表面所造成的假象，这在侦探故事中是屡见不鲜的手段。他们估计，我应该看这个问题，但由于陶醉在自己的聪明才智上，以致错误地会计，既然雷切特不会讲法语，那么，我一点差二十三分时听到的那个声音，一定不是他的，因而作出，那时雷切特一定已经死了这样一个错误的结论。然而，我深信，一点差二十三分到一点的段时间里，雷切特由于麻醉的作用正处于熟睡状态。”
    “可是，这一手段竟然成功了！果真，我打开门，住外看了看。我确实是听到说的法语，假如我是那么令人不可置信的愚笨，以致不会意识到那些话的意义，就必然会引起我的关注。必要的话，麦克昆先生现在就可站出来，他会说：‘对不起，波洛先生，那不是雷切特在说话，他不会讲法语。’”
    “那么，真正的作案时间是几点呢？是谁杀了他呢？”
    “根据我的看法，仅仅是一种看法，雷切特是在将近两点时被杀的，也就是大夫所给时间范围的最后时刻。”
    “至于谁杀了他──”
    他停顿了一下，看了看他的听众。一个个都睁大双眼，注视着他，专心致志地听他讲话。整个餐车异常安静，简直可听到一根针落在地上的声音。
    接着，他又慢条斯理地说：
    “在一个现象，始终引起我的注意，那就是我很难把整个谋杀归罪于车上的某一个人，以用归结于相当奇怪的巧合，即，那些在我印象中很难凑到一起的人，竟然互相作证，证明对方作案时不在现场。于是，麦克昆先生和阿巴思诺特上校互相提供了作案时对方不在场的证据──而这两个人看起来，根本不象早就是互相认识的。同样的情况，还有英国男佣人和意大利人；瑞典女人和英国姑娘。由此我对自己说：‘这是异乎寻常的──他们不会都有嫌疑的！’”
    “于是，先生们，我的心忽然亮堂了，他们都是有嫌疑的。因为，这么多与阿姆斯特朗家有关系的人，同乘一趟车旅行，这种巧合非但不合乎情理，而且也是不可能的。这不是偶然的，而是精心策划的。我记得阿巴思诺特上校说的，有关陪审团的一句话。一个陪审团由十二个人组成的──车上有十二位旅客──雷切特被戳了十二刀。于是，一直使我困惑的疑团──一伙不寻常的人，在一年中旅行的淡季，同乘伊斯坦布尔──加来车旅行──得到了解释。”
    “雷切特逃脱了美国的判决。毫无疑问，他是有罪的。我隐约看到了一个自己任命的十二人的陪审团，他们宣判了雷切特的死刑，然而，由于情况紧急，被迫担任了行刑队的角色。根据这一假想，整个案子就豁然明朗了。”
    “我把它看作一个完美的拼花艺术，各人都扮演他（或她）所分配到的角色。一切都安排的十分巧妙。任何可能受到怀疑的人，都会有一个或几个人站出来替他作证。并把事情搅乱。哈特曼的证词，在怀疑凶手是外来人，而又证实不了作案时机时，是必要的。这样，伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢的乘客就没有危险了。所有证词的每个细节都是事先设计好的。整个设计就象一个安排得非常巧妙的拼花玩具。每加一片新的，就对破案增添了一分困难。正如我朋友鲍克先生说那样，这个案子就一支幻想曲一样，简直不可能！这正好是他们所指望的。”
    “有人会问，这个结论可以解释一切吗？我说，可以。伤痕的性质──每一刀都是由不同的人戳的。伪造的恐吓信──因为是假的，写出来只是为了作个证据。（毫无疑问，一定有真的信，用来警告雷切特注意自己的命运，当然，已经被麦克昆烧毁了，并用其他的信调了包。）然后，是哈特曼说的，被雷切特叫去的故事，这当然是彻头彻尾的谎言──以及对对那个神秘人物的描述：小个子，黑脸膛，说话象女人的男人。这样描述很恰当，因为，它不会牵连到任何一个真正的列车员，而且，同样可能是一个男人或是女人。”
    “用刀刺，这个主意，最初看来是古怪的。然而，经过一番思考以后，就会感到一切都是十分符合实际情况的。匕首是每个人──无论强壮还是体弱的──都会使用的武器，而且不会弄出声音。我猜想，尽管我可能是错误的，十二个人都轮流通过哈伯德太太的包房，走进熄灯的雷切特的包房──戳了他一刀！他们决不会知道，究竟哪一刀实际杀死了他。”
    “那最后一封信，雷切特可能已在枕头上发现的那封，现在已经被人小心地烧毁了。假如，有关阿姆斯特朗案件的线索一条也没留下，那么，就绝对没有理由怀疑车上的任何一个旅客了。于是，就可认为是外来人干的，接着，就产生了一个所谓的‘小个子，黑脸膛，说话象女人的男人’，车上的一个或更多的旅客都出来证明看见过这个人，而且还看到他在布罗特下了车。”
    “我不很确切地知道，当这些阴谋者发现这一部分计划，由于列车事故而不可能实施时，他们打算怎么办。我想象，他们匆忙商量了一下，决定立即下手。这样的话，一个或许所有的旅客必然会受到怀疑，但对这一可能性，他们早就预料到了，而且已经有所准备。唯一的补救方法是只需要把事情搅得更加乱七八糟。于是，在死者的房里故意留下了两条所谓的线索──这第一是阿巴思诺特上校受到牵连（证明他不在场的证据最足，而且他与阿姆斯特朗家的关系也最难证实）；第二，就是那块手帕，使得德雷哥米洛夫公爵夫人有了嫌疑，而她的社会地位，她的孱弱的身体，以及她的女佣人和列车员的作证，就不致使她处于不利的地位。为了更进一步地把事情搞乱，他们又捏造了一个身穿鲜红色睡衣的神秘女人，企图转移人们的视线，分散人们的注意力。我要再次为这个女人的存见作证。当时，有人在我房门上用力敲了一下，我从床上跳起来，朝门外望去──看到一个穿鲜红色睡衣的人在远处消失了。他们谨慎地选择了列车员、德贝汉小姐和麦克昆三人为她作证。当我在餐车与人交谈时，有个人，我想，一定是个富有幽默感的人，竟然关切地把那件鲜红色的睡衣放在我的箱子的最上层。这件睡衣原先是从哪里来的，我可不知道。我怀疑这是安德烈伯爵夫人的，因为，她的行李里只有一件雪仿绸的长睡衣。这件衣服做得美观精致，不象睡衣，倒象是茶服。”
    “麦克昆第一个获悉，那封如此小心烧毁的信，竟然还有一点没烧完，而且正好留有阿姆斯特朗这个字。他肯定马上去和其他人取得联系。恰恰是这个时候，安德烈伯爵夫人的地位才变得危险起来。她的丈夫立即采取措施，涂改护照。这是他们的第二次不幸。”
    “他们统一口径，完全否定和阿姆斯特朗家有任何关系。他们知道，我不可能马上获得真情；他们相信，除非我怀疑到一个特殊人物，我是不可能找到案子的症结的。”“现在，还有一点值得我们思考。假如我对末案的推论是正确的──我相信，一定是正确的──列车员显然也参与了这一阴谋。但是，果真如此的话，凶手是十三个，而不是十二个。跟往常的惯例──‘这么多人中，有一个人是有罪的。’是不一样的，我面临的问题是，这十三个人中，只有一个是无罪的。这个人谁呢？”
    “我得出一个非常奇怪的结论，即，没有参与谋杀的人，一定是被认为最有可能去杀人的人。我指的是安德烈伯爵夫人。我对她丈夫的急切和心情印象很深，他以名誉担保，庄严地向我发誓，那天晚上，他的妻子从来没有离开过她的包房。我也就确定，安德烈伯爵代他的妻子，可以这么说，戳了雷切特一刀。”
    “假如是这样的话，皮埃尔•米歇尔肯定是十二人中的一个。然而，怎么解释他们的同谋关系呢？他是一个正派人。多年以前，他就被公司雇用了──并不是那种接受贿赂，帮助谋杀的人。再者，皮埃尔•米歇尔必定和阿姆斯特朗案件有牵连。可这看起来，似乎是非常不可能的。于是，我记起来，那个死了的保姆是个法国姑娘。假如这位不幸的姑娘是皮埃尔•米歇尔的女儿。这样，一切都可得到解释了，这也可用来解释，谋杀的地段是怎么选择的。还有谁，在这出戏中所扮演的不是那么清楚呢？我把阿巴思诺特上校当作阿姆斯特朗家的朋友。他们可能一起渡过整个战时。女佣人，希尔德加德•施密特，我能推测出她在阿姆斯特朗家的地位，也许我过于性急，但我本能地觉得，她是个称职的厨娘。我给她设了个圈套──她上当了。我说，我知道她是个好厨娘。她回答说：‘是的。所有的女主人都这样说。’然而，假如你被雇用作女佣人，你的主人将很少有机会知道，你是否是个称职的厨娘。”
    “下面，再来谈谈哈特曼，他看起来，似乎肯定不是阿姆斯特朗家里的人。我只能知道，他曾经和法国姑娘恋爱过。我说到外国女人的媚人之处。他的眼泪忽然夺眶而出，他却假装被白雪弄得眼睛发花了。”
    “最后，剩下哈伯德太太。哈伯德太太，情允许我说，在这出戏中，扮演了一个最重要的角色。由于住在雷切特的隔壁，她的嫌疑是最大的。理所当然，她不可能求助于任何作案时不在场的借口。若要扮演她所饰的角色──一个完全逼真的，略微可笑的美国慈母──非要一个艺术家不行。然而，确有一个艺术家与阿姆斯特朗家有关系──阿姆斯特朗的太太的母亲──琳达•阿登，一个女演员……”
    他停住了。
    于是，哈伯德太太开了口，她的声音柔和，深沉，完全不象她在旅行中的声音。
    “我总是设想，我扮演的是喜剧角色。”
    她继续往下说，还是那么柔和。
    “旅行手提包的疏忽是愚蠢的。这表明，一个人应该经常演习演习。我们曾经试验过──我想，那时我是在双号包房。我根本没想到插销的位置会有不同。”
    她略微移了移，眼睛凝视着波洛。
    “你知道了整个事情的来龙去脉，波洛先生。你是个聪明绝顶的人。可是，即使是你，也想象不出那天，纽约是多么的可怕！我简直伤心得要发狂──佣人们也是这样──阿巴思诺特上校也在那儿。他是约翰•阿姆斯特朗最好的朋友。”
    “战时，他曾救了我的命。”阿巴思诺特上校说。
    “当时当地，我们大家就决定──也许我们是疯了──我不知道──凯赛梯逃脱的死刑，以后必须执行。我们有十二个人──或者说是十一个人──苏珊的父亲当然远在法国。
起初我们想，最好用抽签来决定谁去执行。但是，最后，我们决定用现在这个办法。这是司机安东尼奥建议的。以后，玛丽和赫克托•麦克昆研究出了详细的计划。他始终敬慕索妮亚──我的女儿──是他，给我们确切地说明，凯赛梯的钱是怎么使他得以逃脱死刑的。”
    “我们用了很长的时间，才完善了我们的计划。我们首先跟踪雷切特。最后，哈特曼跟上了他。于是，我们不得不设法使马斯特曼和赫克托受他雇用──或者至少是他们中的一个。结果，我们的目的达到了。然后，我们和苏珊的父亲商量。阿巴思诺特上校对有十二人这一事觉得很敏感。他似乎想到，应该把事情办得更有条理。他不太喜欢用刀杀，但他同意这样做确能解大部分困难。再说，苏珊的父亲也愿意。苏珊是他的独生女。我们从赫克托处获悉，雷切特迟早要乘东方快车从中东回来。由于皮埃尔•米歇尔实际上已经在那趟车上做事，这个机会真太好了，决不能错过。此外，这还是个稳妥的办法，不至于连累外界的任何一个人。”
    “我女婿当然也知道了。他坚持要和她同行。赫克托想方设法，使雷切特选了一个启程的日子。那天，米歇尔一定要当班。我们原想包下伊斯坦布尔──加来车厢上的所有铺位，可不幸的是有一个铺早就被人订购了。它是保留给公司董事的。哈里斯先生，当然是虚构的。但是，任何陌生人和赫克托同住一个包房都是尴尬的。以后，在最后一分钟时，你来了……”
    她稍停了片刻。
    “她啦，”她说，“一切你都已经知道了，波洛先生。你将怎么办呢？如果整个事情必须公布出去，你总不能把所有的责任都算在我，而且只是我一人身上吧？我倒乐意，我一个人就戳了他十二刀。这并非仅仅是因为他要对我的女儿以及我的外孙女儿的惨死负责，而且还要对其他的小孩子负责，也许他们还在还还活着，并且生活得很幸福。这才是更重要的。
黛西之前，可能已经有其他的小孩子负责，也许他们现在还活着，并且生活得很幸福。这才是更重要的。黛西之前，可能已经有其他的小孩惨遭他的毒手──将来，也许还有其他的小孩。社会已经宣判过他死刑；我们只不过是执行判决而已。然而，并没有必要，宣布所有这些人都有罪。所有这些善良忠诚的人儿──可怜的米歇尔──玛丽和阿巴思诺特上校──他们是那么的相亲相爱……”
    她那深沉而充满感情的，震人心弦的声音──一度使无数纽约观众激动不已的声音奇妙地回响在挤满了人的餐车里。
    波洛看了看他的朋友。
    “你是公司的董事，鲍克先生，”他说，“你有什么要说的？”
    鲍克清了清嗓子。
    “依我之见，波洛先生，”他说，“你提出的第一个推论是正确的──肯定是正确的。
我建议，南斯拉夫警察来时，这就是我们能够提供的结论。大夫，你同意吗？”
    “当然同意。”康斯坦丁大夫说。“至于医学方面的证据，我想──呃──我可以作一、二处奇妙的修改。”
    “那么，”波洛说，“由于结论都已经摆在你们面前，我可以荣幸地告退了。”
